

--- PAGE 1 ---

Academic Editor: Gianni D’Angelo
Received: 15 December 2025
Revised: 2 February 2026
Accepted: 4 February 2026
Published: 11 February 2026
Copyright: © 2026 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license.
AI
Review
A Comprehensive Review of Deepfake Detection Techniques:
From Traditional Machine Learning to Advanced Deep
Learning Architectures
Ahmad Raza 1,*
, Abdul Basit 1
, Asjad Amin 1, Zeeshan Ahmad Arfeen 2,*
, Muhammad I. Masud 3
,
Umar Fayyaz 1
and Touqeer Ahmed Jumani 4
1
Department of Information and Communication Engineering, The Islamia University of Bahawalpur (IUB),
Bahawalpur 63100, Southern Punjab, Pakistan; abdulbasit028363@gmail.com (A.B.);
asjad.amin@iub.edu.pk (A.A.); umar.fayyaz@iub.edu.pk (U.F.)
2
Faculty of Electrical Engineering & Technology, The Islamia University of Bahawalpur (IUB),
Bahawalpur 63100, Southern Punjab, Pakistan
3
Department of Electrical Engineering, College of Engineering, University of Business and Technology,
Jeddah 21361, Saudi Arabia; m.masud@ubt.edu.sa
4
College of Engineering, A’Sharqiyah University, Ibra 400, Oman; touqeer.ahmed@asu.edu.com
*
Correspondence: ahmedraaza52@gmail.com (A.R.); zeeshan.arfeen@iub.edu.pk (Z.A.A.)
Abstract
Deepfake technology is causing unprecedented threats to the authenticity of digital media,
and demand is high for reliable digital media detection systems. This systematic review
focuses on an analysis of deepfake detection methods using deep learning approaches,
machine learning methods, and the classical methods of image processing from 2018 to
2025 with a specific focus on the trade-off between accuracy, computing efficiency, and
cross-dataset generalization. Through lavish analysis of a robust peer-reviewed studies
using three benchmark data sets (FaceForensics++, DFDC, Celeb-DF) we expose important
truths to bring some of the field’s prevailing assumptions into question. Our analysis pro-
duces three important results that radically change the understanding of detection abilities
and limitations. Transformer-based architectures have significantly better cross-dataset
generalization (11.33% performance decline) than CNN-based (more than 15% decline),
at the expense of computation (3–5× more). To the contrary, there is no strong reason
to assume the superiority of deep learning, and the performance of traditional machine
learning methods (in our case, Random Forest) is quite comparable (accuracy of 99.64%
on the DFDC) with dramatically lower computing needs, which opens up the prospects
for their application in resource-constrained deployment scenarios. Most critically, we
demonstrate deterioration of performance (10–15% on average) systematically across all
methodological classes and we provide empirical support for the fact that current detection
systems are, to a high degree, learning dataset specific compression artifacts, rather than
deepfake characteristics that are generalizable. These results highlight the importance of
moving from an accuracy-focused evaluation approach toward more comprehensive evalu-
ation approaches that balance either generalization capability, computational feasibility,
or practical deployment constraints, and therefore further direct future research efforts
towards designing systems for detection that could be deployed in practical applications.
Keywords:
deepfake; machine learning; deep learning; computer vision; artificial
intelligence; forensics
AI 2026, 7, 68
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 2 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
2 of 42
1. Introduction
Deepfake technology takes advantage of recent technology in artificial intelligence
(AI) and deep learning to produce hyper-realistic so-called synthetic media such as videos,
images, and audio [1,2].
Such rigged contents are capable of portraying people doing or saying things that
did not take place. Sophisticated algorithms, including generative adversarial networks
(GANs), variational autoencoders (VAEs), and transformer-based models are used in the
technology to produce an unprecedented level of realism in its face expression manipulation
capabilities, voice synthesis, and scene generation [3].
Malik et al. comprehensively survey deepfake detection methods for face images
and videos. They classify deepfake generation techniques into five categories and detec-
tion approaches into traditional forensic methods and deep learning-based techniques,
including pixel-level, DNN, and artifact-based analyses.The survey determines the critical
datasets (UADFV, FaceForensics++, and Celeb-DF) and major problems such as scanty
data, unidentified attacks, and chronological incompatibilities, and stressing the desire of
powerful, universalized models to battle the emerging deepfakes [4].
Since their emergence in 2017 deepfakes have experienced evolution far greater in
a short time, fuelled by accessible open source tools, enormous available online data,
and growing computational power. Despite without possible benefits in entertainment,
education and creative technology deep-fakes have immense harm to the cohesion of the
society and democratic systems by causing erosion to human and trust and magnifying
false information [5,6].
This accessibility has created a situation in which disinformation, financial fraud,
identity theft, and forced content generation coming to the fore considerably compromising
privacy, trust and information integrity. Despite without possible benefits in entertainment,
education and creative technology deep-fakes have immense harm to the cohesion of the
society and democratic systems by causing erosion to human and trust and magnifying
false information [7,8].
These challenges highlight the need for effective and efficient detection systems to aid
in addressing the existing issues.These challenges highlight the urgency of robust detection
systems as well as effective mitigation regulatory systems, and raising the media literacy to
fight the risks of the deepfakes [9,10].
This review analyzes the increasing menace of AI created deepfakes which undermine
confidence in online media by obscuring the individual through meddling with endanger-
ing them privacy. It gives a review of technical and non-technical preventive measures,
with incorporating the current detection techniques and regulation frameworks that are
capable of assisting. mitigate these risks [11,12].
The development of deepfake technology was studied by Ruben Tolosana et al. from
the Biometrics and Data Pattern Analytics (BIDA) Lab. They concentrated on facial area
analysis and detection system performance throughout deepfake datasets from the first
and second generations. The study emphasizes how deepfakes are becoming more realistic
and challenging to identify [13].
The intensive development of the deepfake generation and detection techniques was
systematically reported in the recent and extensive surveys.This review notes a growing
complexity of synthesis algorithms and defense mechanisms, especially the complexity
of the more recent generation models, by the use of advanced generative adversarial
networks and transformer generation models [14,15]. The creation of many challenging
benchmark datasets like Celeb-DF has facilitated the stronger testing of detection methods
under a variety of manipulation conditions to augment prior benchmarks with high-quality
celebrity deepfakes that best simulate manipulation issues in the real world [16].
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 3 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
3 of 42
Dolhansky et al. developed the deepfake detection challenge(DFDC) dataset, which
provides a large scale ethically sourced collection of 128,154 movies made with over
3400 consenting actors and with eight deepfake algorithms. In order to overcome the
shortcomings of previous datasets, DFDC offers a variety of excellent material and acts
as a uniform standard foe assessing detection techniques. Strong generalization to real
world deepfakes was shown by the challenge’s top performing models, like EfficientNet
and XceptionNet [17].
The Anti-Deepfake Transformer (ADT) is a vision transformer framework that ad-
dresses the generalization limitations of CNN-based deepfake detectors. ADT leverages
variant residual connections (VRC) in four trans-blocks, an attention-leading module
(ALM), and a multi-forensics module (MFM) to capture both global and regional informa-
tion.Trained with token-level contrastive loss on FaceForensics++, ADT achieves state-of-
the-art cross-dataset performance (84.97% AUC on Celeb-DF) and competitive intra-dataset
results (96.30% AUC on FF++ HQ) [18].
In a 2022 Applied Sciences publication, Khormali and Yuan introduce DFDT, a vi-
sion transformer-based deepfake detection framework. DFDT overcomes the receptive
field limitations of CNNs by modeling both local and global pixel relationships across
various forgery scales. The framework uses patch extraction and embedding, a multi-
stream transformer block, attention-based patch selection, and a multi-scale classifier. It
incorporates a re-attention mechanism for improved scalability and to prevent attention
collapse. DFDT achieves high accuracy on FaceForensics++ (99.41%), Celeb-DF V2 (99.31%),
and WildDeepfake (81.35%), demonstrating strong cross-dataset and cross-manipulation
generalization [19].
Nirkin et al. suggest a face-swapping detection approach which makes use of dispari-
ties between the manipulated face and the surrounding load context with two Xception-net
based networks one is face identification and the other context recognition.The approach
outperforms traditional classifiers, achieving state-of-the-art results on FaceForensics++
and Celeb-DF while generalizing effectively to unseen manipulation methods [20].
Guo et al. introduce Space-Frequency Interactive Convolution (SFIConv), which
replaces standard convolution layers in backbone networks to improve deepfake detection.
SFIConv incorporates Multichannel Constrained Separable Convolution (MCSConv) to
jointly capture spatial and high-frequency manipulation traces. This can be shown by
experiments on HFF, FF++, FDDC, and CelebDF precision and lower cost of computation.
However, its performance drops on unseen manipulations methods highlighting persistent
generalization challenges [21].
Wang et al. provide a deep convolutional Transformers model that uses convolutional
pooling and re-attention techniques to aggregate local and global picture information for
deepfake detection. on benchmarks like FaceForencise++ and Celeb-DF the model performs
better than conventional CNN based baselines. By introducing keyframe extraction to
preserve high-resolution information and mitigate loss of video compression, the method
achieves improved performance, reaching up to 97.69% AUC in FF++ in both within- and
cross-dataset evaluations [22].
Zhao et al. suggest a deepfake detector framework, which is multi-attentional scale-
invariant attention to manipulation artifacts. Their method utilizes a spatial attention
module so as to pay attention to the areas of the face that are susceptible. Whereas channel
attention mechanisms focus on discriminative, manipulation artifact feature representations.
The multi-scale architecture has the ability to detect both local blending boundaries and
distortions of facial features inconsistencies) together with global artifacts (such as lighting
anomalies and lapses in time). Evaluated on FaceForensics++ and Celeb-DF, the algorithm
shows high-quality results on various environments manipulation, that is, competitive
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 4 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
4 of 42
precision without loss of computational performance, which is appropriate to be used in
practice. The trend is represented in this work towards attention-based architectures, which
are explicit about spatial and semantic relationships between deep fake and detection [23].
Yang et al. [24] introduce AVoiD-DF, a multi-modal deepfake detection framework
that learns audio-visual inconsistencies. AVoiD-DF outperforms uni-modal methods by
using a two-stream Temporal-Spatial Encoder (TSE), a Multi-Modal Joint Decoder (MMD)
with bi-directional cross-attention, and a cross-modal classifier to fuse features. It achieves
state-of-the-art accuracy on DefakeAVMIT (91.2%), FakeAVCeleb (92.3%), and DFDC
(91.4%), exceeding Xception, LipForensics, and CViT. To further research, they present
DefakeAVMIT, a dataset of 6480 audio-visual deepfake samples. AVoiD-DF exhibits strong
cross-dataset generalization, effectively detecting unseen forgeries. The better performance
shows the importance of audio-visual synchrony analysis, which is especially to detect
temporal misalignment, phoneme and viseme mismatch, prosodic expression inconsistency
and lip sync degradation (achieved 6–8% improvement of visual-only methods) [24].
This study presents a CNN-based multi-color spatio-temporal method for deepfake
detection. By analyzing facial color inconsistencies and temporal artifacts, it achieves
high AUC scores on FaceForensics++, outperforming physics-based detectors in capturing
flickering and boundary effects. However, computational complexity and limited general-
ization due to sensitivity to advanced GAN-based deepfakes highlight the need for better
temporal continuity modeling [25].
Figure 1 shows a comprehensive multimodal deepfake detection framework that
takes both the visual and audio inputs in parallel and detects the content that is manipu-
lated. This architecture is of fundamental importance as it overcomes the key limitation
of unimodal detection methods that only analyze visual/audio features separately and
are therefore unable to capture cross-modal inconsistencies that are often a reveal of deep-
fake manipulation. The power of the framework is that it is able to identify very subtle
differences between audio and visual streams that are inherently characteristic of synthetic
media, but hard for human observers to detect.
Figure 1.
Multimodal Deepfake Detection Framework analyzing the audio and visual in-
puts to find the cross modal inconsistencies including the lip sync mismatches and prosodic
expression contradictions.
The framework has four interrelated components that work in harmony to result in
robust detection. First, the spatiotemporal encoder processes the video frames to extract
features related to the visual contents representing both inconsistencies in space (within
single frames) and inconsistencies in time (within the frames sequences) that will help to
identify manipulation artifacts that occur across time. Second, an audio feature extractor
is used to analyse acoustic features such as spectral features, prosodic features, and voice
quality features which can be used to identify synthetic audio.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 5 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
5 of 42
Third, these extracted features are fused through a joint decoder using cross attention
mechanisms to learn complex dependencies among modalities e.g., in lip synchronization,
detecting when lip movements are inconsistent with the audio phonemes or when there are
inconsistencies between the dynamics of the facial muscles and those of voice production.
Fourth, alignment and inconsistency detection modules pick up relative light differences
in the audio-visual signal that are hallmarks of synthetic manipulation, such as temporal
levels of misalignment, or unnatural synchronization patterns.
The main innovation demonstrated in this architecture is the use of the cross attention
mechanism in the joint decoder which helps the model to find the correlations between the
video and audio streams that would be invisible to unimodal approaches. For example,
genuine videos have a natural matching between facial muscle movements and vocaliza-
tion, whereas deepfakes have temporal desynchronisations or sound and pronunciation
mismatches, because of the independent generation of visual and audio information.
This type of multimodal method, such as the AVoiD-DF method, can yield better results
(91.2% on DefakeAVMIT, 92.3% on FakeAVCeleb) with respect to unimodal methods thanks
to some complementary information between the different modalities, which explains why
integrated detection frameworks are the current state-of-the-art for deepfake detection.
Rossler et al. present FaceForensics++, a full-size benchmark data and detection sys-
tem that has developed into the standard to assess deepfake detection schemes. These are
the conditions that define the systematic evaluation protocols in various manipulation and
their work compression levels and techniques (Deepfakes, Face2Face, FaceSwap, Neural-
Textures), making it possible to reasonably compare methods of detection. The sample
consists of 1000 original videos manipulated with five variations of methods in generating
conditions estimating method-based detection abilities. This quality measure addresses
past constraints in the area where inconsistent assessment guidelines impaired significant
assessment comparisons of performance between studies. FaceForensics++ was referenced
more than 3000 times and has been the most commonly-used benchmark in our reviewed
corpus (40% of studies) [26].
Jayakumar et al. present a conceptualized deepfake detection model that is visually
interpretable and is based on an EfficientNetB0 backbone trained on a subset of FaceForen-
sics++. Using MTCNN as the face detector and other preprocessing methods, such as
scaling, normalizing, and augmentation, the system has 89.58% fidelity under human-
grounded evaluation with Anchors XAI and SLIC as the segmentation system in generating
visual explanations about manipulated areas. Anchors perform better than LIME when it
comes to giving similar interpretations, although additional testing in bigger datasets is
necessary [27].
Zou et al. propose a semantics-oriented multitask learning framework for deepfake
detection, introducing a dataset expansion technique and a joint embedding approach
using vision-language models. Their Semantics-based Joint Embedding DeepFake Detector
(SJEDD) utilizes face semantics, bi-level optimization, and automated task focus and is
significantly outperforming 18 state-of-the-art detectors on 6 datasets that it competes in.
The lack of variety in datasets and the complexity of computation is a challenge, and the
generalizability and interpretability of SJEDD are improved [28].
Cozzolino et al. introduce POI-Forensics, which uses contrastive learning to de-
rive identity-specific features by using real videos and an audio-visual deepfake detec-
tor. The technique impacts strong cross-dataset results, such as an AUC of 73.4% on
FakeAVCelebV2 and good results on pDFDC and KoDF, by comparing audio and video
embeddings with a reference set. Its usefulness in facial reenactment (AUC: 70–80%) is
however lower and it requires having a large set of references [29].
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 6 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
6 of 42
Pham et al. had done a dual study benchmarking both on facial forgery and facial
detection the data used is a collection of forged images (91,885 large data set) and videos
(2000 videos) out of FaceForensics++. The authors made the comparison of conventional
computer vision algorithms, and the deep learning algorithms such as XceptionNet and
GAN-Fingerprint and their stability to brightness, resolution, and so on and compression.
Most techniques were greatly affected by compression Despite GAN-Fingerprint being
stronger. This bi-dimensional benchmarking data gives users the option to confronts
forging and detection procedures directly and provides helpful performance information.
Nevertheless, certain information was lost due to the limitation of OCR [30].
On black-box, grey-box and white-box evaluation of 16 state of the art detectors,
Le et al. systematize deepfake detection using a five stepping conceptual framework
environments with data sets such as DFDC Spatial-temporal and transformer models out
distort others, especially detect subtle changes of a face. However these limited problem of
diversity and repeatability of datasets, and only 30 percent of the models are open source
hinder generalization. The paper focuses on the architecture of the model and data variety
as necessary to effective deepfake detection [31].
Shahzad et al. examine cinematographic deepfake detection ability of ChatGPT-4 by
compares the results with human judges and the latest AI models in the FakeAVCeleb
dataset. ChatGPT with context-rich prompts is similar in human-comparable performances
(65 percent) compared to AI models (87.5–97.5 percent) but underperforms AI models.
Although its interpretabilities and generalization are good strengths, the use of traditional
characteristics and inability to work with simple prompts limits its functionality. The paper
recommends that future detection systems can be enhanced through the integration of deep
learning with large language models (LLMs) [32].
Rana and Sung provide a summary of deepfake detection in their IWSPA has in their
tutorial and dividing approaches into Digital Media Forensics, Face Manipulation, Machine
Learning models like (SVM, CNN) and other Computational Methods. On the visual
materials and facial landmarks, and when analyzed on a dataset such as FaceForensics++,
the weaknesses are evident of individual methods. They suggest mixed methods and
different data sets to increased protection against emerging deepfakes [33].
Figure 2 shows a detailed classification of deepfake detection techniques in a tax-
onomic structure of three main categories and methodologies are classified depending
on their underlying algorithm and operation principles. This classification is important
in order to comprehend the landscape of approaches to detection since it highlights the
fundamental trade-offs between multiple and methodology paradigms, which ultimately
help researchers in choosing the suitable techniques for particular deployment scenarios.
The tri-partite taxonomy reflects the evolution of the detection methods from the old school
signal processing methods to the classical machine learning and finally to the latest deep
learning architectures.
The first category, which includes Deep Learning-Based Detection Techniques, in-
cludes advanced neural architectures such as Transformers, Convolutional Neural Net-
works (CNNs), Long Short-Term Memory networks (LSTMs), Capsule Networks, Gener-
ative Adversarial Networks (GANs), XceptionNet, Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs),
Autoencoders and attention mechanisms. These approaches are currently leading the
research field because of the capacity to automatically learn hierarchical representations of
features from raw data with state-of-the-art accuracy on benchmark datasets. However,
as detailed in Sections 2 and 4, this category shows a large amount of variability in terms of
the generation of the need for computational resources and cross-dataset generalization
capabilities. The second category, MachineLearning and Traditional Methods, comprise of
Support Vector Machines (SVM), Random Forest, K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) & Logistic
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 7 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
7 of 42
Regression. There comes a case where we have approaches that are based on handcrafted
features, and some classical optimization techniques. Despite the fact that such models
are overshadowed by deep learning in latter literature, our analysis in Section 3 shows
that the accuracy of these models is competitive with much lower computational overhead,
especially Random Forest which is able to get 99.64% accuracy on DFDC. The third category,
which is Traditional Image Processing Techniques, includes frequency domain analysis
methods such as Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT), Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) and
Pixel and Frequency Analysis, Edge Detection and Wavelet Analysis that take advantage of
statistical regularities in deepfake generation processes.
Figure 2. Deepfake Detection Techniques Classification Diagram. The diagram uses color coding to
distinguish methodology categories: blue for deep learning techniques, green for machine learning
methods, and yellow for traditional image processing approaches.
This taxonomic organization makes some very important points related to method-
ological diversity and research gaps. The underlying rate of deep learning approaches
(approximately 70% of reviewed studies) represents the current research trends, but our
systematic evaluation refutes the affirmation of complexity of architecture equates to
better performance.
Traditional methods have intriguing advantages in terms of interpretability, compu-
tational efficiency, and deployment feasibility which should be continued to explore in
parallel with the deep learning innovations. The classification framework is obviously not
just an organizational tool, but it is an analytical instrument than discovers the need to have
multi-dimensional evaluation criteria that include accuracy, efficiency, and generalization
and not only to optimize accuracy.
Generative adversarial networks have boosted the development of deepfake technol-
ogy (GANs). This has developed to severe worries as to whether digital media can be
trusted, which means that there should be powerful detection systems. Cao and Gong [34]
disclose that although the accuracy was very high (0.94–0.99) in controlled environments,
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 8 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
8 of 42
present detection models are susceptible to Gaussian noise adversarial attacks weak cross-
method generalization and backdoor exploits. This review addresses the recent advance-
ment and identifies the main challenges and antagonistic threats of coming up with a secure
and reliable method of detecting deepfakes [34].
1.1. Novel Contributions
This review makes four innovative contributions that differentiate it from existing
deepfake detection surveys and provide new knowledge regarding the capabilities, limita-
tions and future directions of deepfake detection.
1.1.1. Contribution 1: Deployment-Centric Evaluation Framework
Unlike previous surveys focused on architectural categorization, in this review, meth-
ods are addressed from the deployment point of view by systematically comparing the
different methods with their associated practical constraints such as their computational
overhead, the robustness to cross-datasets, and the need to operate in real time. We
show that methodological superiority is not a given, but context sensitive—transformer
architectures are superior in a cross-disease setting despite the computational burden and
classical machine learning approaches are competitive in terms of accuracy with little
resource needs in particular deployment scenarios. This framework changes a focus on
evaluation of “which method is best” to a focus on “which method is optimal for specific
operational constraints.”
1.1.2. Contribution 2: Challenging Deep Learning Dominance Assumptions
Through this rigorous analysis of the type of computational efficiency, we dispute
common assumptions of the superiority of deep learning over traditional methods. We
show that using Random Forest, we obtain 99.64% accuracy on DFDC with 2 ms inference
time (better than many deep learning methods that need 60 ms to attain 91% accuracy).
This result, which was systematically documented in many different traditional methods,
shows that intelligent feature engineering can be a very good competitor in comparison to
learned representations in resource-constrained applications, and suggests that an implicit
assumption in the recent literature is incorrect-namely, that complexity in the architecture
guarantees superior performance.
1.1.3. Contribution 3: Systematic Cross-Dataset Generalization Analysis
We provide the first quantification of cross-dataset generalization failures across
areas of methodologies to reveal systematic 10 to 15% of degradation of performance,
which hints of learning dataset specific rather than a universal deepfake characteristic.
While Le et al. [31] point out the issues with generalization and discuss theoretically, our
systematic empirical study quantifies the patterns of degradation and shows that such
patterns are the same for transformer (11.33% decline), CNN (15%+ decline) and traditional
methods. Such proof is a fundamental limitation: something that needs paradigm shifts in
the methodologies for training as well as dataset construction, not so much incremental
refinements within the architecture.
1.1.4. Contribution 4: Comprehensive Computational Efficiency Quantification
We give the first systematic comparison within computational overhead (inference
time, parameter count) between the different methodology categories, and it turns out
that quite often marginal increases in accuracy necessitate disproportionate increases of
computational cost. As an example, for ADT, it delivers only 1% better accuracy than for
XceptionNet even with being 4x more computationally costly. This quantification enables
evidence based architecture selection between performance and efficiency for specific
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 9 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
9 of 42
deployment scenarios—critical information missing from existing surveys mainly dealing
with accuracy. These contributions separately present researchers and practitioners with
practical understanding to select methods, convey basic limitations requiring research focus
or attention, and set evaluation frameworks focusing on practical feasibility of deployment
together with laboratory performance.
1.2. Research Gap and Motivation
Despite the recent rise in research focus on deepfake detection, the literature in the
topic has a number of critical limitations that hinder our understanding of detection ca-
pabilities and the ability to deploy them in practice. First, the literature to date is mostly
focused on deep learning approaches and systematically understudies or ignores competi-
tive performance of traditional machine learning approaches under certain deployment
constraints. This prejudice on the part of the educated for architectural complexity tends to
cloud situations in which simpler methods may provide better efficiency-accuracy trade-
offs, especially in resource-constrained or in any real-time applications. Second, most
reviews break methods down by the type of architecture (CNNs, Transformers, LSTMs)
without systematically considering the underlying trade-offs among computational effi-
ciency, detection accuracy and cross-dataset generalization—factors that have been shown
to be important when assessing the viability of real-world system deployment beyond
suspiciousness benchmarking on many datasets, which include a diversity of raw datasets
including images, videos, corpus biologies, and more. This methodological aspect of
taxonomy over performance trade-offs offers little information for practitioners to aid in
choosing detection methodologies within particular operational scenarios.
Third, benchmarking performance comparisons in existing literature usually focus on
within-dataset accuracy (ranging from 99%+ accuracy on FaceForensics++) without report-
ing or ignoring cross-dataset generalization failures that make many approaches unsuitable
for production systems that must contend with evolving manipulation approaches.
The methodical body of cross-dataset performance degradation and what these pat-
terns indicate about fundamental limitations in current procedures for how to detect have
largely remained untested. Fourth, there is an underexploration of the complexity dimen-
sion versus the practical deployment viability dimension here is almost no analysis of the
computation cost (inference time, number of parameters, memory) versus the marginal
performance benefits. This oversight is especially important because detection systems
need to be scaled for various platforms beforehand from high-performance servers to
mobile devices. Finally, the field is missing rich synthesis of the methodological diver-
sity that spans from deep learning all the way to classical machine learning and more
traditional image processing techniques and it is difficult to understand the full landscape
of the different detection approaches and their relative strengths in terms of different
evaluation dimensions.
1.3. Research Questions
To fill these critical lacuna in deepfake detection literature, we deal with this systematic
review which contains four critical research questions.
1.3.1. RQ1: Comparative Performance Across Methodological Paradigms
How do various detection methodologies, including deep learning architectures (Trans-
formers, CNNs, LSTMs), classical machine learning methodologies (SVM, Random Forest,
KNN) and traditional image processing techniques (DCT, DFT, wavelet analysis) com-
pare with each other with respect to the dimensions of detection accuracy, computational
efficiency and ability to generalize to new automated datasets?
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 10 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
10 of 42
1.3.2. RQ2: Cross-Dataset Generalization Patterns
What are the systematic patterns in cross-dataset performance degradation when
the considered methods for detection are tested on datasets they have never seen before
and what can their patterns tell us about whether currently considered approaches learn
deepfake characteristics that are generalizable rather than dataset-specific?
1.3.3. RQ3: Viability of Traditional Methods
Do certain traditional machine learning and image processing approaches provide
feasible alternatives to deep learning approaches in particular deployment scenarios with
limited computational resources, real-time processing needs, or the need to provide some
form of model interpretability?
1.3.4. RQ4: Architectural Innovations for Generalization
I am already involved in the research, perhaps not quite yet (nor even close), but in
my own views, the best questions are how can we achieve the goals that matter most
(not all) and how can we make it most reliable with what is or is not in the most
instrumented representation?
These research questions pertain to our systematic analysis of studies published
between 2018–2025 for the purpose of providing evidence to assess detection capabilities,
fundamental limitations, and promising research directions for the field.
1.4. Review Objectives
This extensive systematic review aims to have three main objectives which are directly
related to the research gaps and questions found.
1.4.1. Objective 1: Comprehensive Methodological Synthesis
We systematically synthesize the deepfake detection methodologies from a total of
peer-reviewed studies of deepfake detection methods published between January 2018
and December 2025 by which approaches are categorized into 9 different technological
categories which are in a deep learning architectures [Transformers, CNNs, LSTMs, Capsule
Networks, GAN de Synthesis, XceptionNet, RNN, Autoencoders, Attention Mechanisms],
classical machine learning methods [Support Vector Machines, RandomForest, K Nearest
Neighbors, Logistic Regression], and the traditional image processing methods [Discrete
Cosine Transform, This taxonomic organization covers the first comprehensive mapping
of methodology diversity across the different spectrum of possible detection approaches
instead of just focussing on deep learning methods.
1.4.2. Objective 2: Multi-Dimensional Performance Analysis
We perform from rigorous comparative performance analysis on three benchmark
performance data sets (FaceForensics++, DFDC, Celeb-DFase and Celeb-DF) and quantify
accuracy efficiency trade-offs as well as cross-data sets generalization powers for represen-
tative algorithms belonging to each category of technology. Unlike existing reviews, which
mainly focus on single metric optimization (most commonly in the form of accuracy on
FaceForensics++), in our analysis, we systematically assess three key dimensions related
to performance evaluation: (1) detection accuracy for various types of manipulations and
quality levels, (2) computational efficiency, in terms of the inference time and numbers of
parameters, and (3) cross-dataset generalization, in terms of the problem of degradation
in performance, on unseen data distributions. This multi-dimensional framework offers
means of deployment centric evaluation taking into consideration economically important
operational constrains beyond the laboratory environment.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 11 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
11 of 42
1.4.3. Objective 3: Fundamental Limitation Identification and Future Directions
We recognize failure patterns in the literature in terms of methodology as well as
suggest evidence-based directions for future work to address basic challenges related
to generalization, efficiency, and deployment issues. Through performed cross-dataset
analysis, we report whether performance degradation shows random manifestations or
systematic limitations that indicate that the methods currently in use learn dataset specific
artifacts and not universal deepfake features. This is a highly important evaluation, which
will steer a field away from attempting to improve the accuracy slightly on corners and
saponified benchmarks, toward solving underlying issues of detection failure.
1.5. Review Methodology and Organizational Framework
This systematic review adheres to a systematic approach for the systematic coverage
and rigorous analysis of the deepfake detection literature. Whilst narrative reviews do
not require the formality of protocols in systematic reviews (PRSMA guidelines), we
use transparent selection criteria/analytical frameworks to allow reproducibility and
systematic synthesis.
1.5.1. Literature Selection Protocol
We did systematic searches in five major academic databases: the libraries of the
research communities of the world’s major tech companies and publishers, or more specifi-
cally: the libraries of the world’s major techs—the world’s major tech databases: attractive
and user-friendly libraries of scientific data and content: libraries of which the full text con-
tent is available online. The search term was used with Boolean operators in order to obtain
relevant literature: ((”deepfake detection”OR ”face manipulation detection” OR ”synthetic
media detection” OR ”facial forgery detection”) AND ”deep learning” OR ”machine learn-
ing” OR ”computer vision” OR ”image processing”). We limited the temporal objects
within the given papers from January 2018 to December 2025, i.e., the time frames from the
innovation of deepfakes in late 2017 to current state-of-the-art methods. This period spans
the full development of various detection techniques from the initial convolution-based
techniques (CNN) to the latest transformer-based models and multimodal models.
The search process has resulted in 327 potentially relevant publications. We applied
systematic inclusion criteria requiring: (1) peer-reviewed publications in either journals
or conferences or including highly-cited preprints (>20 citations) from reputable archives
(arXiv, ResearchGate), (2) empirical evaluation using established/unofficial benchmark
datasets, being either FaceForensics++, DFDC, Celeb-DF or equivalent, (3) clear method-
ological description to allow for methodological replication or critical assessment, and
(4) quantitative performance metrics reporting, including accuracy, AUC, F1-score, etc.;
Exclusion criteria that were removed from our search were: (1) pure theoretical papers
lacking implementation and/or empirical validation; (2) papers that do not contain quanti-
tative results or merely provide qualitative analysis; (3) duplicate publications or extended
versions of previous research publications (we kept the most complete version); (4) papers
that exclusively focus on deepfake generation techniques and not on deepfake detection
techniques; and (5) papers that do not address modalities outside of our scope of study
(e.g., exclusively audio deepfakes lacking visual components, text-based manipulation).
This-focused systematic filtering process produced primary studies that make up the final
review corpus.
1.5.2. Analytical Framework and Categorization
We divided the preferred detection methodologies into three main categories depend-
ing on the algorithmic basis and working principle of the detection. The firstcategory,
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 12 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
12 of 42
Deep Learning-Based Detection Techniques (Section 2) contains nine groups of algorithms,
i.e., the Transformers (dependencies among the global objects, using self-attention mecha-
nisms), Convolution-based Neural Networks (global feature examination, using hierarchies
of space features), Long Short Term Memory networks (dependencies over time), Capsule
Networks (preserving the hierarchies of space), Generative Adversarial Networks (Using
devices gained), Recurrent Multiscale Networks (Acting on events irrespective of spatial
hierarchies) and Multi-level Networks (Multi-scale network) via adversarial training), Xcep-
tionNET (separable convolutional operations for depthwise processing of images), RNN
(processing sequence data networks), Autoencoders (learning process by reconstruction)
and Attention Mechanism (selecting salient features). Such granular categorization makes
it possible to identify architecture-specific abilities and disabilities instead of considering
“deep learning” to be a monolithic category.
The second category, Machine Learning and Traditional Detection Techniques
(Section 3), is the classical supervised learning techniques and the signal processing tech-
niques: Support Vector Machines (Optimization of margin, classification) Random Forest
(decision trees—ensemble) K-Nearest Neighbors (instance-based learning) Logistic Re-
gression (probabilistic linear classification) User Discrete Cosine Transform (Frequency
domain analysis) Discrete Fourier Transform (spectral decomposition) Pixel and Frequency
Analysis (hybrid between space—spectrum) Edge Detection (Gradient-based features)
Wavelet Analysis (Multi-resolution). Inclusion of traditional methods covers the found
gap in current surveys that systematically under-examine approaches that are based on
a non-deep learning strategy, although they may have theoretical advantages in terms of
computational efficiency and interpretability.
The third category, Performance Analysis (Section 4), can be the synthesis in the form of
a comparative evaluation in the benchmark data sets. For each of the reviewed techniques,
we extracted the following information: (1) architectural design, algorithmic technique,
(2) computational requirements (inference time, parameter number, memory footprint
when reported), (3) within-dataset performance on FaceForensics++, DFDC and Celeb-DF
(4) cross-dataset generalization in terms of performance degradation of the tests on unseen
benchmarks, and (5) deployment considerations (real-time capability, hardware).
1.5.3. Evaluation Metrics and Comparative Analysis
In our performance comparison framework, we place a large emphasis on three di-
mensions which are critical for determining practical deployed viability beyond single
metric optimization: First, detecting accuracy is evaluated in three benchmark datasets of
different manipulation characteristics: FaceForensics++ (controlled manipulations using
5 generation methods at multiple compression levels), DFDC (large-scale realistic varia-
tions, 128,154 videos) and Celeb-DF (realistic celebrity deepfakes which are close to realistic
scenarios).The overall accuracy, AUC (Area Under ROC Curve), and F1-score are used
as the metrics of accuracy and can be compared with each other even though the metrics
are heterogeneous as only what the original studies reported is in use. F1-score presents
the combination of precision and recall in a balanced way, which is especially useful with
imbalanced datasets, typical of the deepfake detection tasks [35].
Second, computational efficiency is measured by inference time (mili-seconds frame
or video) and model complexity (number of parameters FLOPs if known). This dimension
touches on the gap we have observed in terms of computational cost benefits, in that insights
into whether there is a great deal of additional accuracy that warrants a great deal of extra
computation for particular deployments (real-time content moderation vs. forensic analysis
vs. resource-constrained mobile deployment). Third, cross-dataset generalization is defined
as performance degeneration when approaches trained using one dataset are tested on a
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 13 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
13 of 42
different benchmark. This metric provides insight into whether techniques are learning the
characteristics of deepfakes in general or these specific datasets—a very important distinc-
tion to make if we are to deploy these deepfake detection methods for practical applications
to real-world scenarios where manipulation techniques might evolve continuously. This tri-
dimensional evaluation framework allows for subtle evaluation beyond conventional tests
of accuracy (i.e., in relation to other studies and datasets, RQ1 comparative performance
tests by methodology and RQ2 generalization patterns across data sets). Methods that excel
in all three dimensions are ideal solutions and those which maximise one dimension at the
cost of another are appropriate for particular deployment situations.
1.5.4. Organizational Structure and Roadmap
The review is defined to increase a understanding from individual methodologies to
comparing synthesis and critical analysis. Section 2 presents a systematic discussion of deep
learning architectures, which starts fromTransformer based architectures (demonstrate su-
perior generalization in spite of computational overhead), through the Commun innovation
technology (CNN-s) architectures (trade between effectiveness and efficiency) to specialized
architectures targeting on solvable challenges (temporal modeling with long short term
memories (LSTMs), spatial hierarchy preservation with Capsule Networks). Within each
family of architecture, we analyze representative methods, document performance in each
of the benchmarks, and detect failure patterns.
Section 3 is an analysis of machine learning and the conventional image processing
methods and by that challenge the assumption that deep learning is overwhelming and
show that it provides the same performance in some situations. For each method cate-
gory (SVM, Random forest, frequency domain analysis), we conduct a synthesis of the
different studies within the set so as to observe, not isolated results, but rather consistent
findings. Section 4 is devoted to comparative analyses of the performance through the use
of structured tables and cross-method analysis synthesis, which relate directly to research
questions using factual evidence. Section 5 (Discussion) involves synthesis of findings to
identify fundamental trade-offs and systematic limitations as well as promising (future)
research path directions. Section 6 (Conclusion), distils some key insights and suggestions
for action.
Such organizational format that CD readers can; (1) understand individual method-
ologies in their architectural context (Sections 2 and 3), (2) compare methods based on
evaluation dimensions through systematic analysis (Section 4), (3) determine basic patterns
and limitations that transcend single methods (Section 5), and (4) draw out ways to use
the methodology to inform the choice of a method and guide future research (Section 6).
The structure allows for both the type of reading that moves toward comprehension for the
deep understanding of particular ideas and the type of selective navigation for practitioners
who may need to find specific information.
1.6. Bibliometric Analysis and Research Landscape
To give quantitative and objective visualization of the research landscape of deepfake
detection, we performed a bibliometric analysis of our 74-study corpus, analyzing pub-
lication trends and methodology evolution and discovering the clustering patterns with
respect to its themes over time.
1.6.1. Temporal Publication Trends and Growth Patterns
Our corpus shows that the research on deepfake detection has grown exponentially,
as the number of publications has grown from 3 studies in 2018 and 23 studies in 2024,
which is a 667% growth rate. This evolution is in numerous dimensions and is thoroughly
reported in recent comprehensive surveys published in the best-tier journals. Media
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 14 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
14 of 42
forensics is also discussed in IEEE reviews around the foundations of media forensics
and media benchmarking challenges, whereas state-of-the-art methodologies and open
challenges are evaluated in surveys published by Springer and Elsevier [36]. Wiley has
systematic coverage of deep learning approaches in the MDPI and ACM publications
emphasize machine learning fusion techniques and perspectives on reliability. In general,
these 2023–2024 surveys intersect as they are focused on defining underlying issues, such
as cross-dataset generalization, computational efficiency and the necessity of the evaluation
frameworks that go beyond single-dataset accuracy measures.In her paper, Kaur et al. talk
about the main challenges of GAN-based generation methods which are the detection
approaches that need to be tailored according to the specific case. The bibliometric analysis
performed by the authors uncovers the trends in publication and the dominant research
fields, thus indicating that there is still an active interest from the academic community
in the GAN-driven detection methods [37]. This acceleration is a true reflection of the
other two factors branching from the problem: an accelerated deepfake threat, as well
as the mature detection methodologies. Publication distribution reveals three clearly
distinguished phases at the end of which CNN-based detection paradigms (1) continued
its founding phase 2018–2019 (15% overall studies), (2) with the diversification phase
2020–2021 (28% overall studies) introducing attention mechanism and spatial-temporal
modelling and (3) with the sophistication phase 2022–2025 including 70% of overall studies.
Figure 3 shows the methodological evolution in 3 different phases. Phase 1 (2018–
2019) Operations for foundational detection capabilities based on traditional hand-crafted
features as Local Binary Patterns (LBP), Histogram of Oriented Gradients (HOG) and
KSZ Lapini Descriptors together with classical machine learning classifiers as Support
Vector Machine (SVM) classifiers and Random Forest classifiers. This phase corresponds
to 15% of the studied, and is focused on the mainly interpretability, and also computa-
tional efficiency. Phase 2 (2019–2021) Corresponds to the switching towards deep learning
architectures, in particular for the second phase where Convolutional Neural Networks
(XceptionNet, ResNet50, EfficientNet), and Long Short-Term Memory networks (LSTMs
networks) for temporal modeling were mostly used. This phase of diversification granted
the introduction of attention mechanisms and hybrid algorithms of fusion for the spatial-
temporal combination, that represent 28% of the total number of studies, which gave a
high accuracy for the detriment of the understanding. Phase 3 (2022–2025) represents the
current state-of-the-art which is composed of advanced Vision Transformers (ADT, DFDT),
multimodal audio-visual frameworks (AVoiD-DF), and hybrid spatialrequency approaches.
This sophistication phase is the one that dominates the current research (70% of studies)
and it focuses on issues related to dealing with cross-dataset generalization problems while
remaining computationally feasible for use in practice.
Keyword analysis shows three major research clusters. The Deep Learning Architec-
ture cluster (45% of studies) emphasizes CNNs, Transformers, LSTMs, and hybrid models
for the accuracy of the models with architecture innovation. The Cross-Dataset Generaliza-
tion cluster (25% of studies) discusses issues of lack of performance across benchmarks,
which is directly tied to our RQ2. The Computational Efficiency cluster (18% of studies)
studies the trade-offs of accuracy and efficiency as well as deployment constraints which
support our deployment-centric evaluation framework. The Multimodal Detection cluster
(12% of studies) involves unresolved audio-visual integration approaches and represents
new areas of research. The Multimodal Detection cluster (12% of studies) focuses on audio-
visual synchrony enlargements such as lip-sync violations and voice-expression violations
with approaches such as AVoiD-DF achieving 91–92% accuracy.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 15 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
15 of 42
PHASE 1
2018–2019
Traditional
Hand-Crafted
LBP, HOG, KAZE
SVM, Random Forest
15% studies
PHASE 2
2019–2021
Deep Learning
CNNs, LSTMs
XceptionNet
ResNet, EfficientNet
28% studies
PHASE 3
2022–2025
Advanced
Vision Transformers
ADT, DFDT
Multimodal
70% studies
Timeline
2018
2019
2020
2021
2023
2025
Interpretable
Accurate
Generalizable
Evolution of Deepfake Detection Methodologies
Figure 3. Temporal evolution showing three phases: Phase 1 (2018-2019) traditional methods (red
background), Phase 2 (2019–2021) deep learning (yellow background), Phase 3 (2022–2025) advanced
transformers (green background).
1.6.2. Benchmark Dataset Utilization Patterns
Consistent with Figure 4, FaceForensics++ is far more popular for benchmarks (40%
studies), followed by DFDC (25%) and Celeb-DF (20%). This high of a concentration
leads to possible evaluation biases because methods that have been tuned for FF++’s
controlled conditions, might learn dataset specific in addition to the overall characteristics
of deepfakes. The growing number of specialized datasets (WildDeepfake 3%, audio-visual
datasets 3%, speech-specific datasets 2%) is reflective of understanding that the assessment
of single-benchmark evaluation method is inadequate as evidence for useful detection
capability in practice.
Figure 4. Global Distribution of Deepfake Incidents with Highest Concentration in the US, China
and India. The color intensity on the map indicates incident frequency: red represents highest
concentration, orange represents high concentration, yellow represents moderate concentration,
green represents low concentration, and grey represents areas with no data or very low incidents.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 16 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
16 of 42
1.6.3. Citation Network and Methodological Evolution
Analysis of citation patterns reveals ground-breaking works that set paradigms for
detection: date datasets creation by Dolhansky et al., Wang et al. [17,18] are highly influ-
ential publications that define the further research directions. Citation network analysis
shows the evolution in methodology from the extraction of spatial features (2018–2019),
attention mechanisms (2020–2021) to the focus currently on generalization across data sets
and computational efficiency (2022–2025).
1.6.4. Research Gap Validation
This bibliometric landscape empirically gives our identified research gaps legitimacy.
The systematic 10–15% cross-dataset performance degradation ability we document is
25% of the papers with explicit evaluation of the generalization ability considered, sug-
gesting that this is still not a fully solved problem. This 18% of studies concerned with
computational efficiency makes sense for our finding that this dimension is given far too
little attention compared to its importance in deployment. The focus of 70% of studies on
deep learning approaches justifies our observation that traditional approaches of machine
learning are systematically underexamined, even though they are competitive performers
on certain deployment scenarios.
This bibliometric analysis enhances the contribution of our review by showing that
our categorisation framework (Figure 2), identified research gaps (Section 1.2), and multi-
dimensional evaluation approach (Section 1.5.3) are consistent with objective patterns in
the research landscape and not with subjective choices in categories.
2. Deep Learning-Based Detection Techniques
There are three main categories of deepfake detection techniques.
2.1. Transformers (TFM)
The transformer-based methods can be considered an ideal development of deepfake
detection from which global contextual dependencies may be derived by leveraging the
self-attention mechanisms that traditional Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are
not able to model well enough. The aggregated study of transformer implementations
shows that there are three possible architectural forms strategies like pure vision trans-
former, hybrid CNN-transformer, and specialized spectral ultrasound in forensic uses.
The examples of vision transformer show a high level of cross-dataset generalization as
compared to CNN-like methods. The Anti-Deepfake Transformers of Wang et al. [18]
with variant residual connections (ADT) sets the paradigm at 96.30% on FaceForensics++
and 84.97% on Celeb-DF, which is a drop of 11.33 percent, which, though a massive loss
in performance, does still beat the majority of CNN-powered cross-dataset evaluations.
The DFDT structure introduced by Khormali and Yuan develops this strategy. Multi-stream
transformer and re-attention are used and which reaches 99.41% on FaceForensics++ and
displays a resilient cross-manipulation generalization. This observation suggests an inverse
relationship between the accessibility and refined digital resources and the phenomenon of
deepfakes. On the contrary, countries that have enforced healthy ones have put in place
sound policies and systems of digital governance, showing fewer serious cases of deep-
fakes. Mixed methods are promising better efficiency. Similar results (AUC 0.951 on DFDC)
are obtained by Coccomini et al.’s Effective ViT, but with less reduction and deliberate
CNN-transformer interleaving. The MoEFW architecture even maximizes the efficiency of
parameters by means of a Mixture of Experts. LoRA architecture, which gives evidence
that the transformer benefit can be realized with fewer computational expenses [38].
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 17 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
17 of 42
A geographical visualization of the deepfake incident distribution by nation with
a color-coded intensity scheme to reflect the documented prevalence of deepfake cases
worldwide is available in Figure 4. This global perspective is important to comprehend
the patterns of proliferation of deepfakes and their relationship with infrastructure of
the technologies, frameworks of digital governance and factors of societal vulnerability.
The visualization exposes extreme geographical inequities that are correlated with levels
of both technological development and regulatory maturity and provides insights into
sociotechnical aspects of the threats of the creation of deepfakes beyond the technical
difficulty of their detection.
The map identifies three layers of the concentration of deepfake incidents. The nations
with the highest incidence of a disease (shown in red color) include the United States,
China, India, and Indonesia representing countries with large populations, well-developed
technological infrastructure, and widespread adoption of social media. The presence
of this correlation indicates that deepfake proliferation is ample both by the availability
of complex generation tools, as well as by the existence of massive digital populations
available for manipulation. Some high-incidence countries, which are colored in orange,
include Brazil, Turkey, Russia, and South Korea, which have high levels of deepfake activity
which are fueled by factors such as active social media landscapes, political polarization,
and the advancement of technology. Moderate incidence countries (yellow) such as Mexico,
Germany, Ukraine, Japan, and several European countries have registered measurable but
less frequent deepfake challenges which could be a result of stronger regulatory options and
lower digitization. Low incidence areas (green) which include Australia, Nordic countries,
and some European countries reflect comparatively fewer cases showing evidence of
serious incidents, suggesting further that digital governance, media literacy interventions
and proactive regulation seems to be successful in mitigating the threat of deepfakes.
The geographical distribution demonstrates a fundamental issue with the proliferation
of deepfakes; namely, countries with the most advanced technological capabilities have the
highest rates of occurrence, suggesting that the process of technology is an enabler of both
capabilities-diagnosis and deepfaking.
This pattern highlights a need for more than technical detection solutions to tackle the
issue—integrated approaches incorporating technological detection, regulatory frameworks
and governance of the platforms as well as media literacy in the public sphere need to be
considered. The higher concentration of incidents in technologically advanced countries
also hints that currently the deepfake regime may only reflect the initial stages of global
proliferation with possible accelerated proliferation when generative AI tools become more
readily accessible in currently low incidence areas. This geographical analysis thereby
focuses the urgency of establishing detection systems that are scalable and computationally
efficient and can be implemented in all kinds of technological and economic circumstances.
Also, transformers try to solve fundamental CNN drawbacks with global attention
their computational loads make modeling and restrict their practical application. The con-
sistent cross-dataset performance advantage: attention mechanisms are able to get more
generalizable artifacts of manipulation, but the efficiency-accuracy trade-off has not been
sorted out as far as real-time applications are concerned [39].
Distributions of Datasets in Deepfake Detection Survey
Figure 5 describes the relative use of benchmark datasets of the 74 studies reviewed
in this review and shows that alongside focus on accepted benchmarks, there is also in-
creasing diversification to consider specialized and multimodal evaluation frameworks.
This distribution pattern has profound implications for the understandability of detection
performance in general and reported detection performance in particular, because dataset
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 18 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
18 of 42
selection fundamentally informs both the kinds of manipulations targeted to be de-
tected by attacks and scenarios of evaluation that are realistic for real world applications
during deployment. Tables 1–3 summarize the performance characteristics and compara-
tive results for the analyzed methodologies.
FaceForensics++ (FF++) is the winner of this evaluation, with 40% of dataset usage
being divided between reviewed studies. This prevalence is in line with FF++ being the
de facto standard benchmark, and provides for controlled evaluation using 1000 origi-
nal videos manipulated through 5 different generation methods (Deepfakes, Face2Face,
FaceSwap, NeuralTextures, FaceShifter) and several different compression levels. However
this dominance produces potential biases in evaluation, because of, for instance, the sys-
tematic performance degradation [loosening by at least 10–15%] documented in Table 3
where methods optimized for FF++ may learn dataset motivated compression artifacts, not
generalizable deepfake characteristics. The DeepFake Detection Challenge (DFDC) dataset
is 25% of the usage, and it offers large-scale evaluation with 128,154 videos featuring differ-
ent actors and realistic changes of lighting, compression and recording conditions. The fact
that DFDC is a more challenging benchmark with more real world artifacts results in lower
absolute accuracy score (Table 2) compared to FF++ (Table 1). Celeb-DF stands for 20%
of evaluations that focus on high-quality celebrity deepfakes that are close to real-world
manipulations encountered in the social media world.
Figure 5. Deepfake Dataset Distribution.
Table 1. Performance Comparison on FaceForensic++ Dataset.
Ref
Year
Method
AUC
Params
(M)
Time
(ms)
Strength
Limitation
[5]
2022
ADT
96.30%
86
45
Cross-dataset
High cost
[6]
2022
DFDT
99.41%
92
50
Scalable
Complex
[16]
2022
Hybrid-TF
89.58%
23
18
Interpretable
Small data
[28]
2022
EfficientB0
97.00%
5
12
Low overfit
Limited test
[40]
2022
DFT-MF
99.20%
1
8
Motion
Motion only
[41]
2021
3D-CNN
99.33%
48
35
Temporal
High cost
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 19 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
19 of 42
Table 2. Performance Comparison on DFDC Dataset.
Ref
Year
Method
AUC
Params
(M)
Time
(ms)
Strength
Limitation
[13]
2023
AVoiD-DF
91.40%
120
60
Audio-visual
Needs sync
[25]
2024
GPT-4o
64.25%
–
–
Zero-shot
Low accuracy
[42]
2023
MCX-API
90.87%
35
25
Open-set
Unknown drops
[37]
2024
Random Forest
99.64%
0.01
2
Low cost
Manual features
Table 3. Cross-Dataset Generalization Performance.
Ref
Method
FF++
Acc
Cross-DS
Acc
Drop
(%)
Analysis
[5]
ADT
96.30%
84.97%
11.33
Best transformer
[28] Hybrid-TF
97.00%
97.00%
0.00
Robust augmentation
[42] MCX-API
98.48%
90.87%
7.61
Strong pairwise
[43] XceptionNet
95.00%
78.50%
16.50
Typical CNN
[37] Random Forest
99.64%
85.20%
14.44
Manual features
Average degradation: 10–15%.
The distribution points to an important methodological trend in the general direc-
tion of specialized evaluation frameworks. Smaller specialized datasets have a sum of
the usage for 15%, i.e., WildDeepfake (3%) providing in-the-wild manipulations, audio-
visual datasets (DefakeAVMIT and FakeAVCeleb; 3%) allowing multimodal evaluation and
datasets specific to speech synthesis (ViTIMIT and DI-TIMIT; 2%). This diversification is
due to increasing recognition of the fact that single-benchmark evaluation is insufficient to
provide evidence for practical detection capability. The movement towards multimodal
data sets is especially notable because it shows that AVoiD-DF is better able to exploit the
audio-visual inconsistencies, suggesting that in future detection systems, it is necessary
to tackle multiple modes of manipulation at the same time. However, the persistency of
FF++ even with the qualities of saturation (of >99% by most methods) makes it appear that
evaluation practices are lagging behind a level of methodological sophistication that could
shape the need for evaluation strategies to involve cross-dataset evaluation protocols with
even harder benchmarks to access involving contemporary deepfake generation capacities.
Surveys by IEEE and Springer include more recent complete publications which note
that the transformer architectures have better generalization than CNNs, but need to
take into consideration computational efficiency issues in practice. IEEE benchmarking
research points the significance of the evaluation frameworks that introduce orderly eval-
uation of accuracy and efficiency trade off to support our multi dimensional evaluation
strategy [10,11,15,36]. Detailed surveys of various publishers reveal that more and more
focus is built on the understanding that architectural complexity cannot be deployed with-
out deployments being considered in terms of inference time, parameter efficiency and
resources consumption, which justifies our deploy-based approach [9,12,13,37].
2.2. Capsule Networks (CapsNet)
The implementation of capsule networks takes the form of architecture swaps, which
address. Convolutional Neural Network spatial hierarchy preservation limitations alone
retain the drawbacks of having the same computational cost as transformer methods.
The overall assessment suggests that the spatial relationships can be maintained in
capsule networks and can be reduced maximal loss of information in the process of
feature extraction.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 20 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
20 of 42
Capsule-Forensics by Nguyen et al. [44] provides some basic capabilities for discov-
ering the spatial association of facial images and videos, a strong generalization between
datasets, FaceForensics. It is the integration strategies, as illustrated by Local Binary Pat-
terns are used with the modified HRNet in iCops-Dfake by Khalil et al. and Capsule
Networks, attaining superior detection on Celeb-DF and DFDC-P data with multi-modal
feature combination [45]. The article by Stanciu and Ionescu centers on the optimization of
dynamic routing, and it has achieved high precision and lower parameters on benchmark
sets. The hybrid Capsule LSTM model has efficiency in parameters and can compete with
XceptionNet, especially effective with performance that has many fewer parameters (34 M
vs. 27 M), lossless on DFDC all levels, and frame selection [46].
2.3. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN)
The constructions of approaches based on convolutional neural networks have been
the main method of deepfake detection, going from basic classification networks to highly
developed multi-modal architectures. The combined examination uncovers that there are
still overfitting issues that cannot be solved with new architectures and that there are certain
specialized areas where CNN methods are still very competitive [40,47].
Multi-modal integration strategies show promising results for comprehensive de-
tection. The innovative VGG-16 CNN with transformer encoder approach utilizes self-
attention for facial artifacts and cross-attention for lip-audio discrepancies, demonstrat-
ing superior performance on DFDC, DF-TIMIT, and FakeAVCeleb datasets through
modality fusion.
The methods employed by CNN still possess substantial computational benefits
compared to the transformer implementations. The CNN architectures proposed by Math-
ews et al. have explainability components integrated into their design, while efficiency
is still preserved. The integrated biosensor based on plasmonic resonance of Mahesh-
wari et al. [41] is able to deliver 1.2 % false positive and 0.5% false negative rates along with
a very small amount of computational overhead [41].
2.4. Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN)
Nguyen et al. propose a multi-task learning system that identifies concurrently and
detects manipulated areas in face images and videos. They use a standard encoder and
decoder test with subdivision based on a binary spectrum (authentic and manipulated) and
pixel segmentation of the manipulated regions. This Multi-task formulation enables the
network to learn a stronger feature representation with the use of supplementary signals
of detection and localization of the supervision objectives. Assessed on FaceForensics++
and Celeb-DF, the approach has good results in terms of its capacity to perform the two
tasks, as well as giving manipulable outputs and localization masks. It is shown in the
work that detection and joint optimization optimize the goals of segmentation provide a
better generalization than that of single-task techniques, especially with the artifacts of
subtle manipulation [44].
2.5. Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)
The implementations of Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) are designed to detect the
errors of the time scale with the help of the sequential processing abilities to recognize
the artifacts of manipulations across video frames. The overall examination shows the
functionality of LSTM on particular scalability constraints of processing large video data,
as well as temporal patterns. The 100% accuracy of Hosler et al. on DFDC using the
Low-Level audio and video descriptor analysis proves a remarkable achievement in the
error detection of emotions. The use of LSTM in semantic temporal analysis. This strategy
plays off on emotions, continuity violations, which deepfake generation is apt to add [48].
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 21 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
21 of 42
The CNN-LSTM integration by Jolly and Shitole consists of the ResNet18 spatial
feature extraction on LSTM temporal dependencies measured on FaceForensics++ with
Gaussian blur image enhancement. But the comparative analysis of Lu et al. shows that
Channel-Wise Spatiotemporal Aggregation (CWSA) is a superior STL-based approach
with emphasis on the shortage of spatial features in LSTM approaches. The systematic
review by Sandotra and Arora puts the LSTM-based approaches in perspective, presents
extensive detection taxonomies, but demonstrates the scalability difficulties of large-scale
video processing programs [49].
2.6. Attention Mechanisms
The various applications of the attention mechanism suggest that it is one of the core
implementation technologies that has made transformers successful, and it has presented
at the same time its portability to deepfake detection. The capacity is uncovered in the joint
examination of the attention process that is capable of capturing contextual dependency,
and also to make detection interpretable. The self-supervised ViT exploration provided
by Nguyen et al. demonstrates the mechanism of attention ability to extract features and
is interpretable by visualizing attention maps. It is in the comparison of frozen weights
and fine-tuning methods that the comparison is drawn, with flexibility in the attention
mechanism to meet different deployment situations [50].
The Meta Deepfake Detection (MDD) proposed by Tran et al. is a combination of at-
tention mechanisms and meta-learning models, i.e, Pair-Attention Loss (PAL) and Average-
Center. Alignment Loss (ACA) by use of block shuffling transformation to increase gener-
alization across unseen domains. Attention mechanisms not only offer the fundamental
technology of transformer success but are also interpretable, to help single-mindedly detect.
Their combination with flexibility is represented by meta-learning and forensic-specific
applications. This is because of the computational cost, which is one of the factors to be put
into consideration during the deployment of such systems [51].
2.7. XceptionNet
Chollet [52] invented XceptionNet, an optimized convolution neural networks (CNN)
architecture with depthwise separable convolutions that are more computationally efficient
and can provide the same detection performance. Chollet’s (2017) modification of depth-
wise separable convolutions provides the computational efficiency boost than Inception
classics. Despite recent breakthroughs in improved transformer-based models deepfake
detection models, XceptionNet is still a notable baseline model [52]. Xu et al. [53] made
a step ahead and proposed the Multi-Channel Xception Attention Pairwise Interaction
(MCX-API) framework involving pairwise learning and multi-color space inputs to enhance
the detection performance. Xu et al. had an accuracy of 98.48% on the FaceForensics++ data
set and 90.87% on the Celeb-DF data set [53]. XceptionNet retains its competitiveness in
the detection of the deepfake phenomenon through relentless optimization of the network
architecture and the invention of new strategies of integration. The persistence of the
research interest in XceptionNet-based methods speaks to the fact that it likely has a place
in research, especially applications where efficiency is of the utmost importance. However,
Thing (2023) shows that transformer-based architectures have better generalization ability
on a wide range of data sets and manipulations [54].
2.8. Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs)
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) implementations are interested in sequential data
processing representing early temporal analysis methods, in detecting temporal inconsis-
tency that laid the groundwork for further development of LSTM and transformers.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 22 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
22 of 42
The work of Guera and Delp is the pioneering work in the field of RNN-based deepfake
detection by using convolutional LSTM networks to determine temporal inconsistency,
developing the paradigm of the sequence-based deepfake detection [53].
RNN methods laid the groundwork of temporal analysis of deepfake detection, which
is later outperformed by the development of LSTM and transformers. long-term depen-
dency modelling and computational efficiency [55].
Distribution of deep learning Figure 6 shows architectures used in various reviewed
deepfake detection papers indicating the relative popularity of various neural network
paradigms showing the predominating research trends for methodology choice. This distri-
bution of the architecture gives us a glimpse into the history of the field from convolutional
methods toward more advanced methods that incorporate attention and temporal model-
ing and also shows the gaps that still remain in the search of certain architectural families
regardless of their potential benefits.
Figure 6. Deep Learning Architecture Distribution.
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) make up the largest number at around
45–50% of the deep learning implementations, as they are proven to be a core architecture
used for computer vision tasks, as well as being an effective architecture for extracting
spatial features in facial regions as well. The prevalence of CNN variants from simple
designs such as VGG-16 to sophisticated variants such as EfficientNet and ResNet—shows
the versatility of this architecture in different detection situations. However, as documented
in Section 4, CNN based approaches show cross dataset generalization problems with a
performance degradation around >15%, which leads us to believe that pure convolutional
approaches may reach fundamental limits in learning manipulation invariant features.
Transformer-based architectures have an implementation share of 25–30% and this is a
huge and increasing share reflecting recent realization that self-attention mechanisms can
capture long-range dependence and global context when compared to convolution’s local
receptivity fields. Transformers exhibit significantly superior cross-dataset generalization
(11.33% degradation for ADT) as described in Table 3 = admirable expresses control in
prolonged in the cost when with kept to CNNs practicalities (3–5× more computation) to
deployment trade-offs.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 23 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
23 of 42
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) Networks 15–20% of architectures, mostly used in
consistency modeling in temporal series and sequential artifact detection among frames of
a video. LSTMs provide the opportunity to learn explicit temporal (could not be captured
by purely spatial approaches) dependencies that larger purely spatial approaches cannot,
as illustrated by the semantic temporal analysis approach by Hosler et al. [48], which
achieved 100% accuracy DFDC (learning by modeling emotional continuity). XceptionNet
10–12% of implementations for its depthwise separable convolutions allowing for efficient
computation with competitive accuracy 98.48% on FF++, 90.87% on Celeb-DF for MCX-
API variant.
Capsule Networks and Autoencoders together account for only 2–5% each,representing
under-explored architectural families regardless of theoretical benefits (capsule networks
maintain spatial hierarchies maxpooling operations destroy, autoencoders make it possible
to detect unsupervised manipulation through reconstruction error analysis. This distribu-
tion shows the concentration of research on known architectures (CNNs, Transformers)
and may result in overlooking hybrid approaches or specialized architectures that may
be able to solve specific problems in detection. The field would benefit from systematic
exploration of diversity in architectural use beyond the dominant paradigms, however,
exploring the hybrid CNN-Transformer designs to find the right balance between efficiency
and generalization of children models like Effective ViT is successful.
2.9. Autoencoders
The applications of autoencoders rely on unsupervised learning of features and
reconstruction-based detection, which provides manipulation properties that are unique
direction finding using reconstruction error analysis.
The Stacked Denoising Autoencoders by Vincent et al. exhibit excellent learning of
feature representations when presented with corrupted features, which is better than the
conventional autoencoders classification tasks that could be used in deep learning detection.
Autoencoders work well in unsupervised learning to detect deepfakes, although they
are not as good as supervised deep learning. The reconstruction-based new forms of
manipulation can be regarded as being well-detected by the detection paradigm, but more
work is needed to be able to compete [56].
So, upon a systematic comparison of the architectures of deep learning, there are
underlying trade-offs. Transformers show much better cross-dataset generalization (11.33%
decline) compared with Philips (CNNs that perform 15%+ worse), 3–5× computational
overhead (30–45 ms vs. 10–15 ms). LSTMs are very good in temporal analysis of 100%
semantic accuracy, but have a scalability issue. Achieving 91–92% accuracy, multimodal ap-
proaches can be limited in real-time deployment by an inference time of 60 ms. CNNs offer
the best trade-off to be practically implemented. No one architecture is proactive—selection
is on the basis of operational requirements.
3. Machine Learning and Traditional Detection
It was found, as reflected in recent extensive reviews in Springer, Elsevier, and MDPI
journals, that even though deep learning is winning the majority of the literature, conven-
tional machine learning and feature-based methods have a high practical appeal. These
surveys bring out the interpretation, computational and specific manipulation advantages
of classical methods, and establish the result of our study that Random Forest has an 99.64%
accuracy on DFDC with a tiny computational bias. IEEE and ACM surveys point out the
significance of testing different paradigms of methodology not just architectural complex-
ity and to this end justifies architectural complexity our deployment-oriented evaluation
model, which takes into consideration not only efficiency but also accuracy.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 24 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
24 of 42
3.1. Support Vector Machine (SVM)
The texture feature approach used by Yasir and Kim gives the percentage of 92% (Face-
Forensics++) with handcrafted features (HOG, LBP, KAZE), 96% (Celeb-DFv2) accuracy at
handcrafted features SVC classification, proving that properly designed features can be
highly competitive with learned representations and also use much less computational
resources [57].
The issues of profound class imbalance are covered by the extensive analysis conducted
by Rezvani et al. [58] in deepfake detection; there is a prevalence of real samples. False
positives would be minimized, and the minority-class would be improved through cost-
sensitive SVM implementations, which puts a particular focus on the latter data-balancing
incorporation towards forensic strength. The Cholesky kernel by Sahoo and Maiti has
a covariance to optimize its decision boundary better than RBF and polynomial kernels;
it has better precision/recall than its counterparts’ metrics. This improvement shows
that SVM is still going through the process of being developed by adding the kernel.
High-dimensional method innovation of feature space, such as facial texture analysis.
Noiseprint and Laplacian filtering with Linear are used in the residual noise texture analysis.
The selected results are SVM to recognize interpretable, explainable deepfakes based on
5-fold cross-validation forensic application decision mechanisms [58].
The SVM methods have a superb computational performance and readability, and de-
velop advanced feature engineering competitive. Handcrafted features surviving domi-
nance assumptions in deep learning, particularly in deployment, where the decisions and
limitations on the available resources are explainable [59].
3.2. Random Forest & Decision Trees
The superior performance of the implementations of the random forests disputes
profoundly with assumptions of superiority in learning. There are several scenarios of
evaluation demonstrating Random Forest as the best method.
VOTSTACK model shows the efficiency of ensemble learning, approaching the ac-
curacy of 91.6% with the help of the Random Forest meta learning and the Xception
feature extraction. The method is better than LSTM+Xception Net (83.42%) and standalone
Random Forest (70.6%), which show social media deepfake detection potential using an
ensemble [60,61].
Random has the greatest risk to the deepfake detector of deep learning, with superior
performance of Random Forest. They are very accurate, hence low computational and
inherently interpretable, intelligently designed traditional machine learning styles can be
improved on most realistic deployment applications [62].
3.3. K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN)
KNN implementation shows inconsistent characteristics of performance in terms of
feature extraction and ensemble scenarios. This overall analysis shows the importance
of KNN in specific situations, but it also reveals the weakness of KNN in standalone
deepfake detection.
The Deepfake/Faceswap classifier using KNN in the hybrid method of Alzurfi and
Altaei reaches 0.95 accuracy with the combination of VGG16 transfer learning, but the
performance of the hybrid system is highly dependent on the type of manipulation. It can
be seen in the comparative analysis that KNN works best with certain combinations of
features and struggles with others [63].
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 25 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
25 of 42
Comparative Performance Analysis of State-of-the-Art Methods Across
Benchmark Datasets
Figure 7 shows the results of a comprehensive comparative analysis of the performance
of nine representative methods using three benchmark datasets (FaceForensics++, DFDC,
Celeb-DF) to reveal critical patterns in the performance of these methods, which challenge
traditional assumptions about the superiority of certain methodological approaches and
highlight systematic limitations of existing approaches to detection. This multi-dataset
comparison is very important, in order to gain an understanding of the reliability and
generalisability of the detection methods, for single-dataset evaluation gives an incomplete
and potentially misleading evaluation of the practical viability of deployment.
Figure 7. Methods Performance Comparison Across Datasets. The table uses color coding to
highlight performance levels across different benchmark datasets, with darker shades indicating
higher accuracy.
The visualization uncovers three basic patterns with great implications. First, there is
a remarkable stability of the performance of FaceForensics++ in terms of methods-while
most of them appear to be in the accuracy range between 97–99%, a few of them reach
up to 99 or more (DFDT, MCX-API, 3D-CNN, DFT-MF, etc.). This saturation implies that
FF++ has very little discriminative power for modern detection techniques, and is less of
reflecting challenging discrimination against autism than an item for baseline verification
of the soundness of a methodological approach. The uniformly high performance suggests
that the controlled conditions of manipulation and consistent compression artifacts offered
by FF++ combined with even relatively simple methods to achieve near perfect accuracy
casts doubt on the further utility of this dataset for distinguishing state-of-the-art methods.
Second, DFDC performance shows considerably higher variance; varying from 65% (GFT-
40) to 99% (Random Forest), with most methods showing 85–93% accuracy. This dispersion
reflects the more realistic and difficult characteristics of DFDC, such as diverse manipulation
quality, varied quality of compression artifact, and in-the-wild recording conditions.
Importantly, Random Forest’s impressive 99% DFDC accuracy is challenging the
deep learning dominance notions and has already proved the fact that intelligent features
engineering using classical machine learning algorithms can measure up (and even clearly
outperform) intelligent AI architectures (neural networks) in some scenarios. Third, Celeb-
DF has the worst performance reduction with only ADT providing evaluation results
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 26 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
26 of 42
(89% accuracy) between displayed methods. This limited evaluation coverage and lower
accuracy highlight Celeb-DF as the trickiest of all cross-dataset benchmarks, and contain
high-quality deepfakes that are close to real-world manipulations.
The cross-dataset performance patterns highlight a fundamental limitation of state-
of-the-art detection methodologies methods perform well on data they were trained on
but when faced with an unseeen distribution of data they tend to systematically degrade
across data distributions. The performance gap between FF++ (97–99 %) and DFDC (99–
65%) for identical methods suggests that detectors are learning dataset specific artifacts:
compression pattern, blending boundary, color space inconsistencies and not fundamental
and generalizable properties of synthetic media. This interpretation is supported by the
fact that there is no guarantee that advanced architectural sophistication makes the method
robust across datasets—for example, methods that are 99% on FF++ might be far worse on
DFDC despite being built upon advanced deep learning architectures. The figure therefore
demonstrates the importance of some cross-dataset evaluation protocols and development
of training methodologies that are optimised for generalization and not maximisation of
single-datasets accuracy. Future research needs to be concerned with ways of evaluating
how well methods will work across different benchmarks rather than whether they achieve
marginal accuracy improvements on saturated datasets such as FF++.
The XtractNet of MFCC-GNB of Gujjar et al. reaches the maximum accuracy of KNN
99.93 to prove the use of KNN in audio deepfake. It is needed to show that it can detect
deepfake voice detection with relevant feature extraction (MFCC) and Gaussian [64].
Naive Bayes enhancement KNN shows to be extremely variable with feature extrac-
tion, maintenance, and orchestral amalgamation. Although it demonstrates a potential
in detecting audio deepfakes, as well as in special ensemble cases, visual deep fake stan-
dalone KNN performance recognition is weak as compared to other machine learning
methods [65].
3.4. Logistic Regression
The CNN ensemble stacking of Hafeez et al. uses the Logistic Regression as a high-
level dense combination based on DenseNet121/Inception V3, with 98.7% accuracy on
140,000 images. This is a method that shows the effectiveness of Logistic Regression meta-
learning on ensemble architectures, where the CNN feature extractors need to be integrated
several times [43].
In the investigation of deepfake detection, evaluation can be performed. The method
of forensic evaluation developed by Reis and Ribeiro transforms similarity in a facial
recognition logistic regression score to likelihood ratios, with Half Total Error Rate. Improv-
ing the forensic applicability (HTER) of 0.020 and AUC of 0.994 on Celeb-DF (v2) by the
interpretation in probabilities.
Atas and Karakose et al.’s [66] ensemble approach improves the accuracy of identifying
spoof photos based on multi-classifier consensus by combining SVM and logistic regression
with random forest following CNN feature extraction.
The ensemble model of Chiang et al. is a mixture of Logistic Regression and SVM,
and Random Forest in Vision Transformer-based feature extraction, which had 74 percent
accuracy on Celeb-DF (v2) and DeeperForensics-1.0 datasets with no harm to computational
performance in low-resolution, compressed, short video [66].
3.5. Traditional Image Processing Techniques
Traditional methods of image processing examine deepfakes using the spatial and
frequency domain characteristics. A comparative view of these complementary approaches
is given in Figure 8.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 27 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
27 of 42
Figure 8 illustrates the basic differences of space and frequency domain detection
approaches. Spatial domain artifact—this appears as directly visible inconsistencies within
the visual data. Eye blinking problems are abnormal eye blinking patterns and irregular
frequency than natural human being blinking behavior. Skin texture blur results as non-
natural smoothness and loss of characteristic pores and fine details which authentic faces
show. Facial boundaries exhibit irregular shapes and inconsistent colors at the point of
transition between the manipulated area and actual content. Color incons dalje Vector
paintings, The differences between face and background areas as a result of processing by
independent computations at the stage of deepfake generation.
Spatial Domain Artifacts
Frequency Domain Artifacts
Eye Blinking Issues
Checkerboard Patterns
Abnormal blink patterns, irregular fre-
quency
Visible in DCT coefficient maps
Skin Texture Blur
High-Frequency Noise
Unnatural smoothness, loss of pores
Anomalies in DFT spectrum
Facial Boundaries
Wavelet Discontinuities
Irregular edges, color mismatches
Multi-scale manipulation traces
Color Inconsistencies
GAN Fingerprints
Face-background color differences
Characteristic Fourier signatures
Figure 8. Spatial vs. Frequency Domain Artifacts. (left) spatial issues (blurry skin, eye problems,
boundaries). (right) frequency issues (checkerboard, DFT noise, wavelet patterns). Hybrid methods
detecting both achieve superior performance. The table uses color coding: red for eye blinking issues,
yellow for texture blur, green for boundary problems, orange for color inconsistencies (left column);
corresponding frequency domain artifacts are shown in the right column.
Frequency domain artifacts on the other hand, expose traces of manipulation in the
spectral representation of images. Checkerboard patterns become evident within DCT
coefficient maps, which occur as an upsampling demand as face generation makes place.
High frequency noise looks like anomalies in the Fourier transform that filter out synthetic
content from real images. Wavelet discontinuities reveal the traces of manipulation at multi-
resolution scales of the frequencies. GAN fingerprints present as specific characteristic
Fourier signatures of particular generative architectures, allowing this to be detected as
well as attributed to their source.
The complementary nature of these categories of artifacts explains why hybrid types
of detection methods perform better. Spatial only methods can miss signature of attributes
in frequency domains, while methods based on frequency domains can fail to equate
visually apparent inconsistencies. Methods that combine both domains like PDCNet with
96.34% accuracy on FaceForensics++, 96.14% accuracy on Celeb-DF, and 88.19% accuracy
on DFDC, show that full analysis on spatial and frequency representations gives more
robust detection than single-domain methods.
3.5.1. Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT)
Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT) techniques based on frequency-domain analysis
methods identify deepfakes both in real time and proactive. Comprehensively, the strength
of DCT lies in behalf of types of particular manipulation, and the opportunities of integra-
tion with existing systems are shown.
The implementation of HashShield inserts a perceptual hash of DCT low-frequency
manipulation detection comparison bands. This approach assists in-house tracking and
privacy protection through forensic usage, indicating that DCT remains consistent with
stable hash extraction of the following tampering [67].
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 28 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
28 of 42
3.5.2. Pixel and Frequency Analysis
At their implementations, PFA strategies are a combination of both the spatial and
frequency domain analysis in order to detect deepfakes comprehensively. The general result
of the collective analysis indicates the efficacy of PFA in the detection of GAN-generated
content and emphasizes computational complexity problems.
Guarnera et al.’s [68] convolutional trace extraction achieves up to 99.81% accuracy on
CELEBA (STYLEGAN2) through EM-based feature analysis from various GAN architec-
tures (GDWCT, STARGAN, ATTGAN, STYLEGAN, STYLEGAN2), offering explainability
by linking features to specific GAN architectures.
The StyleGAN2-ADA identification approach achieves 94% accuracy for identifying
specific generation models through Resnet-18 texture and spatial feature extraction with
SVD processing. While not directly using frequency analysis, the method acknowledges
PFA detectability with 80% noise robustness, enabling forensic attribution [68].
Mao et al.’s PDCNet introduces Pixel Difference Convolution for capturing fine-
grained local patterns through intensity and gradient data aggregation, achieving high ac-
curacy across FaceForensics++ (0.9634), Celeb-DF (0.9614), and DFDC (0.8819) datasets [42].
PFA techniques show promise for model attribution and GAN-generated content
detection, providing special forensic analysis capabilities. Nevertheless, there is a prac-
tical limitation to the scalability of deployment due to the complexity of computing and
restricted extrapolation to sophisticated methods of manipulation [69].
3.5.3. Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT)
DFT performances show the power of frequencies to detect deepfakes and other
benefits of being computationally efficient compared to complicated deep learning methods.
Convertini et al. [70] showed the high performance of Discrete Fourier Transform
(DFT)-based detection methods using several evaluation criteria. Convertini et al. fre-
quency component analysis provided exceptional results, 99.94% F1 scores using Support
Vector Machine (SVM) classifiers (99% accuracy) and 97.21% accuracy using Random For-
est classifiers against StyleGAN and StyleGAN2 manipulations. The high performance
of different classifiers means that it possesses strong frequency domain discrimination
performance [70].
Figure 9 presents a sophisticated cross-modal fusion framework for audio visual
deepfake detection which is a typical example of the architectural principles that can be
employed by multimodal approaches to achieve a better performance compared to uni-
modal methods by exploiting the inter-modal dependencies and inconsistency patterns.
This framework is the cutting-edge paradigm of deepfake detectors, achieving a limita-
tion solved in the past to analyze visual-only or audio-only, because deepfake mimics
cross-modality manipulation artifacts that are very common to detect content of synthetic
generation. The work the architecture provides is the demonstration of how complementary
pieces of information from different modalities can be used to integrate parts systemati-
cally to achieve robust detection of even scarcity of subtle and difficult to perceive traces
of manipulation.
The framework works on four hierarchical levels of processing for progressively
extracting, fusing, analyzing multimodal information. The parallel feature extraction stage
involves processing video frames by a spatiotemporal encoder which captures the visual
features (facial expressions, temporal consistency, blending phenomena) in parallel with
processes related to the audio by an acoustic feature extractor which identifies the spectral
anomalies, prosodic anomalies and voice quality degradation. This parallel processing
allows for efficient processing with modality specific feature specialisation. The multimodal
joint decoder is the key innovation in the framework, by using bidirectional cross attention
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 29 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
29 of 42
mechanisms, allowing the features of each modality to focus on relevant patterns in the
complementary modality. For example, visual lip movement features may pay attention
to corresponding phoneme representations in the audio stream and allow to detect lip
sync inconsistencies that characterize face-swapping and facial re-enactment deepfakes.
These cross attention operations learn complex dependencies between the modalities
that would not be accessible by processing each modality separately. The alignment and
inconsistency detection modules use the cross-modal attention patterns in order to detect
specific classes of audio-visual discrepancies: temporal misalignments, in which audio and
visual events are desynchronized, phoneme/viseme mismatches, in which mouth shapes
are incompatible with speech sounds, and prosodic expression inconsistencies, in which
vocal emotional cues are inconsistent with facial expressions. Finally, the multimodal
classification output combines the context of evidence originating from visual features,
audio features, cross-modal attention patterns and also detected inconsistencies to get a
holistic authenticity rating.
Figure 9. Cross-Modal Fusion Framework for Audio-Visual Deepfake Detection. The diagram shows
the processing pipeline with arrows indicating data flow directions and different colored components
representing distinct processing stages.
The effectiveness of this cross-modal approach is empirically validated by measures
such as AVoiD-DF reaching 91.2% accuracy in the case of DefakeAVMIT and 92.3% in the
case of the standard dataset (FakeAVCeleb), there being a substantial improvement over
the approaches that analyse the visual or audio stream separately. However, as discussed
in Section 4, multimodal frameworks introduce a large amount of computational overhead
(60 ms inference time for AVoiD-DF vs. 8 ms for CNN-only methods) and the need for
complete audio-visual data availability to work, which restricts the use of these technologies
for scenarios involving visual only content such as static deepfake images or muted videos.
Future research must therefore focus on unified architectures that keep the multimodal
performance advantages when there is full modality information and recursively degrade to
robust unimodal operation in the event of only partial modality information possibly using
modality-agnostic attentionics or self-supervised pretraining using a variety of modality
combinations. The framework illustrates that the best practice of deepfake detection
should be to transcend single modality and towards the integrated approaches exploiting
fundamental physical and semantic constraints of authentic audio-visual correspondence.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 30 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
30 of 42
Ni et al. developed a study that developed a biologically-inspired detection method
based on the remote photoplethysmography (rPPG) signal extraction. Their approach,
which processes rPPG signals by using Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) to create Matrix Visu-
alization Heatmaps (MVHM) that are used as inputs for the image classification networks.
This biological signal analysis technique achieved 99.22% detection accuracy, showing how
the physiological signal analysis technique is effective in deepfake detection [71].
Biswas et al. came up with a hybrid detection paradigm where 3D XceptionNet com-
bined with Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT)-based classification is used. Their approach
emphasizes the use of frequency domain feature analysis to detect the high frequency
inconsistencies and achieves an accuracy of 90.29% on the Celeb-DF dataset. Despite its
efficacy, the method has significant computational needs which clinker the way it could
well be properly implemented [72].
3.5.4. Edge Detection
Zhang et al. [73] through benchmark analysis showed that their proposed Cross-
Attention Edge Learning (CAEL) framework was able to detect facial inconsistencies via
Sobel edge detection with higher performance comparing to Canny and Laplacian edge de-
tection methods. The Appearance-Edge Cross-Attention (AECA) This mechanism combines
edge features with facial appearance information, which improves results by a comparative
4% improvement in AUC and shows better results in cross dataset generalization than
appearance only features [73].
3.5.5. Fourier Transform & Wavelet Analysis
Implementations of Fourier Transform Wavelet Analysis (FTWA) combine wavelet
and frequency-domain analysis for thorough deepfake detection, showing better results
for some forms of manipulation. The summative study reveals that wavelet analysis has
benefits over the traditional Fourier approaches to artifacts specific to deepfakes.
A comparative analysis conducted by Wolter et al. through the spatial and frequency
analysis has shown that wavelet packet works better on CelebA and FFHQ dataset compar-
isons with the Fourier methods. The lightweight classifier method demonstrates the robust-
ness of wavelet transforms as an approach for forensic analysis to traditional frequency-
domain methods [74].
Younus et al. propose a deepfake detection approach utilizing artifacts in the frequency
domain using Haar Discrete Wavelet Transform (HDWT) to capture edge inconsistency
that is specific to GAN generated artificial faces. Their approach takes advantage of the fact
that the algorithms that generate deepfakes produce faces with a low resolution to make
them fit the context of the background and are thus subject to distortion and blur, which
introduces exclusive inconsistencies of blur which can be detected by looking at edge pixels
in the wavelet domain, which allows to obtain effective manipulation fraud detection of
manipulated facial content [75].
Uddin et al.
propose a framework by combining multi-level Discrete Wavelet
Transform (DWT) technology and vision transformers, for robust deepfake detection by
frequency-spatial feature combination. By extracting multi-level features of frequencies
using DWT and learning global inconsistencies across local areas of faces using the vision
transformer architecture, their method exposed discriminative details and frequency in-
formation that are missed by simply using spatial-based detection methods, achieving
state-of-the-art accuracy of 99.86% and 99.92% for FaceForensics++ and Celeb-DF bench-
marks respectively [76].
Khan et al. propose a new neurological paradigm for detecting deepfakes by ex-
ploring human brain neural signatures of the brain using electroencephalography (EEG)
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 31 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
31 of 42
recordings of subjects viewing videos of either the real world or a faked video. Applying
Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) to EEG data using k-Nearest Neighbors classification shows
98.25% detection accuracy which is much higher than Wavelet Packet Decomposition with
Support Vector Machines (94.16%) which suggests that human neural responses contain
implicit cues towards authenticity which may be missed by computational models open-
ing interesting venues for passive biometric-based deepfake detection based on cognitive
neuroscience [77].
Wang et al. and Miao et al. [78,79] show the superior performance of Frequency-Time-
Wavelet Analysis (FTWA) methods against classical Fourier-based and traditional wavelet
methods, especially when combined with state-of-the-art attention mechanism and vision
transforms. FTWA’s strength includes the strong frequency domain characterization of
the manipulation artifacts to achieve multi-scale manipulation while retaining the spatial
localization to achieve accurate tampered region identification, which makes it very robust
against the sophisticated state-of-the-art manipulation tools striving to evade spatial-only
detection, yet computation complexity caused by the multi-scale wavelet decomposition is
practical for real-time deployment scenarios [78,79].
Deep learning dominance assumptions confronted by systematic comparison. Random
Forest gives 99.64% accuracy for DFDC with 2 ms inference-15× faster than transformers
(30–45 ms). The method of traditional methods (DFT 99.94%, Wavelet 99.86%) is competitive
when zero training data are used. Traditional approaches have some key benefits, such
as high interpretability for forensic applications, low computational needs for mobile
deployment, and low data needs for applications with high resource constraints. These
results confirm the plausibility of RQ3: traditional methods provide acceptable alternatives
in situations where efficiency, interpretability, or availability of data is more important
than accuracy.
4. Performance Analysis and Comparative Evaluation
Having elaborated in a systematic way deep learning architectures (Section 2) and
machine learning with traditional means (Section 3), we now perform careful comparative
performance analysis in a wide number of benchmark data sets in order to assess detection
accuracy, computation efficiency, and cross-datasets generalization. This multi-dimensional
analysis directly answers our research questions based on quantification of fundamental
trade-offs that go into determining where and when the deployment will be practical
outside of the laboratory. The systematic comparison provides critical information about
challenging conventional assumptions in methodological superiority and about basic
limitations that require paradigm shifts in approaches for detection.
Our evaluation framework uses three main benchmark datasets which have varying
characteristics of manipulation and complex level. FaceForensics++ (FF++) is the most
widely used benchmark consisting of 1000 original videos manipulated using five different
generation methods (Deepfakes, Face2Face, FaceSwap, NeuralTextures and FaceShifter)
with multiple compression levels providing the ability to control the evaluation of the
method-specific detection capabilities. The DeepFake Detection Challenge (DFDC) dataset
provides large-scale, realistic evaluation with 128,154 videos involving diverse actors
and wide lighting conditions with realistic compression effects to provide more difficult
assessment conditions that are close to the real world. Celeb-DF is a collection of high-
quality celebrity deepfakes using advanced generation techniques that look very similar
to the original video, which is a very hard test of cross-dataset generalization, where
the methods must detect manipulations that are quite different from those used to train
them. Together, the combination of these datasets allows for an looks at the detection
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 32 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
32 of 42
robustness given variable manipulate high-quality including the dataset dimensions and
the distribution shift.
We structure our comparative analysis around four related subsections into areas
of complementary performance. First, Section 4.1 provides an in benchmark analysis of
within-dataset performance on FaceForensics++ (Table 1) setting a base-line performance
under controlled conditions and picking architectural approaches with state-of-the-art
performance under the most common benchmark in the community. Second, Section 4.2
evaluates the performance of a DFDC (in Table 2 using scalability and robustness tests to
realistic variations and to complement the performance evaluation, e.g., compression arti-
fact, lighting changes, subject characteristics. Third, Section 4.3 deals with the cross-dataset
generalization (Table 3) to some extent as a means of quantifying the performance degrada-
tion when methods are challenged with an unseen data distribution (that is, the critical test
on whether the detectors have learned generalizable deepfake characteristics, or datasets
specific artifacts). Fourth, Section 4.4 is a comparison of the computational efficiency (Table
to append to the Table 4), the inferring time and parameter overhead, so to determine if
accuracy ap reflects a good trade off vs. complications of parameters boolean “(part of
group ware set)”. scenarios.
Table 4. Computational Efficiency Comparison.
Method
Params (M)
Time (ms)
Accuracy
Efficiency
XceptionNet
23
15
95.00%
High
ADT
86
45
96.00%
Medium
AVoiD-DF
120
60
91.00%
Low
Random Forest
0.01
2
99.00%
Very High
One of the main results that has emerged from this type of analysis is the systematic
performance degradation that occurs during cross-dataset evaluation scenarios. Most
methods lose 10–15% accuracy when tested on different data distribution from training data.
This applies across a variety of transformer-based, CNN-based and traditional methods.
This steady pattern of degradation indicates that there is a fundamental limitation in
that current methods of detection have a tendency of learning dataset-specific results of
compression artifacts and manipulation boundaries and generation signatures as opposed
to generalizable characteristics that are, as, synthetic media. This understanding has vast
implications in the real world of application where, to be useful weapons, systems for
detection must be able to continue robust performance as techniques for the deepfake image
generation continue to develop. The analysis therefore shows that benchmark saturation
(achieving > 99% accuracy on FaceForensics++) can disguise practical limitations and
perhaps cross-detection should be the most critical measure for detection capability.
4.1. FaceForensics++ Benchmark Results
Table 1 shows performance comparison on the FaceForensics++ dataset, showing
the potency of current approaches for detection and the shortcomings of this saturated
benchmark for state-of-the-art detection methods. The table shows that the results of recent
methods keep achieving more than 99% accuracy, which is the performance ceiling for
transformer-based methods (ADT, DFDT), advanced CNN architecture (MCX-API, 3D-
CNN) and specialized frequency-domain approach (DFT-MF) reaching this lower bound.
This saturation hints either at a lack of discriminative power for contemporary detection
methods by FF++, or, at the level of the dataset, a controlled manipulation of the dataset
and a consistent compression artifact allows relatively simple detection methods to be
almost perfect in accuracy.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 33 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
33 of 42
4.2. DFDC Performance Analysis
Table 2 shows the detection accuracy result on the DFDC dataset that has greatly
more performance variance than FaceForensics++ because the combined effect of its more
realistic and challenging characteristics. Unlike the controlled conditions of FF++, the DFDC
contains a diverse manipulation quality, diverse compression artifacts and in the wild
recording conditions, which are closer to real-world deployment scenarios. The distribution
of performance is revealing of important information regarding the robustness of the
methodologies and the relationship between the sophistication of architecture and its
usefulness in the field.
4.3. Cross-Dataset Generalization Assessment
Table 3 quantifies this critical dimension of cross-dataset generalization of showing the
systematic degradation of performance when testing for detection methods on data different
from training data. This analysis specifically addresses RQ2 (cross-dataset generalization
patterns), and it can provide empirical evidence as to whether methods currently learn
when they learn about deepfake characteristics, as generalizable or specific to datasets.
The consequences of the results show that generalization failure is not a singular case but a
systematic deficiency for all types of methodology.
4.4. Computational Efficiency Comparison
Table 4 does the analysis of the computational overhead by comparing the infer-
ence time and number of parameters for Bartlett of representative methods from each
architecture’s category. This dimension relates to RQ1 and RQ3 by showing whether and
how improvements in accuracy at the margin on computationally expensive methods
are justified where the implementation cost in terms computation resources is signifi-
cant, and whether traditional methods indeed provide a feasible efficiency tradeoff for
application-level implementation constraints. The offered analysis shows that the cost of
computation versus the accuracy of the detection is not linear, and will reach a point of
diminishing return as the architectural complexity grows.
5. Discussion
5.1. Principal Findings and Novel Contributions
This systematic review diabetes of 74 deepfake detection studies published at
2018–2025 supply four key contributions to the literature examining ways to advance
deepfake detection beyond what currently exists. First, the use of our multi-dimensional
evaluation framework reveals basic trade-offs between detection accuracy and computa-
tional efficiency and generalization across data are data streams that have been systemati-
cally understudied in previous surveys. While some existing reviews covered the aspect
of architectural categorization and the within-dataset accuracy, our deployment-centric
analysis proved that the methodological superiority depends on the context rather than
the methods themselves: transformer architectures show substantial benefit in later cross-
dataset scenarios where they have 3–5× higher computational costs and convolutional or
traditional ml shows high enough accuracy on specific deployment scenarios where the
resource consumption is minimal.
Several studies that present various all-encompassing surveys published in 2023–2024
in IEEE, Springer and Elsevier, as well as in MDPI, ACM, and Wiley support our systematic
results pertaining to major issues with detection. The IEEE literature has a focus on media
forensics principles and benchmarking specifications compatible with our cross dataset
evaluation focus. The state-of-the-art problems and the generalization failures that we
report are recorded independently in Springer and Elsevier reviews and are corroborated
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 34 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
34 of 42
by MDPI and Wiley analyses which indicate our results on competitiveness of traditional
methods [10,11,15,36]. The reliability-oriented survey of ACM [9] also gives us a com-
plementary view of legitimizing our deployment-oriented model. The homogeneity of
results between numerous independent leading publications provides our arguments on
the necessity of assessment systems on accuracy, efficiency and generalization as opposed
to maximisation of individual-data set performance indicators [9,12,13,37].
Second, we question the current assumptions regarding the relative superiority of
deep learning over traditional methods by showing that Random Forest can achieve with
99.64% DFDC accuracy in 2 ms inference time, compared with multimodal deep learning
approaches that take 60 ms to achieve 91.4% of accuracy. This finding contrasts the tacit
assumption in the recent literature that architectural complexity is a guarantee of good
performance, and finds that intelligent feature engineering methods can compete well with
learned representations, in situations with limited resources.
Third, our systematic cross-data sets find generalizable degradation across all types of
methodologies 10–15% of an average is generalization failure wherein users learn dataset
specific artifacts rather than deepfake generalizations. This is an extension of observations
by Le et al. [31] and offers empirical evidence for generalisation challenges that have been
mentioned at the theoretical level by [34].
Fourth, we present full-scale computational efficiency analysis that shows that even
marginal improvements in accuracy are often disproportionately costly computationally—for
example, a architecture improvement from 1% accuracy—ADT—which is 4× the computa-
tional cost of XceptionNet—ADT, is analyses of this sort allow one to make evidence-driven
architecture choices for specific deployment scenarios.
5.2. Comparison with Existing Review Literature
Our results both support and add to past deepfake detecting reviews while expose
critical weaknesses of existing syntheses. [35] provide comprehensive architectural taxon-
omy of detection methods but do not systematically test how computationally efficient or
cross-dataset generalizable they are–dimensions that we show are important to test when
developing practical methods for assessing deployment Their review classifies approaches
by generation and detection methods but does not quantitatively compare the tradeoffs
between accuracy, efficiency and generalization and hence practitioners find it difficult to
choose appropriate approaches to impairment rate under particular operational constraints.
Ref. [4] identify chronological incompatibilities, lack of generalization, and data scarcity as
major challenges but lack systematic quantification of degradation patterns of performance
that our Table 3 provides. Their qualitative assessment of generalization difficulties is useful
but not sufficient for helping to uncover the magnitude and consistency of cross-dataset
failures.
Ref. [31] introduce a five-stage concept of acquisition, pre-processing, detection, post-
processing, decision for detector evaluation and Stem importance of model architecture and
data diversity. Our review goes beyond this approach by adding computational efficiency
as a dimension for algorithm evaluation that holds equal importance with accuracy and
generalization, and uncovers trade-offs that were not present in their analysis. In addition,
that [31] found only 30% of reviewed models are open-source, which makes reproducibility
difficult, we show that this reproducibility crisis is worse for performance claims—too often
10–15% degradation is removed from the model when cross dataset evaluation is performed,
which is not reported in original publications focused on in dataset optimization. Rana
and Sung classify methods as Digital Media Forensics, Face Manipulation, and Machine
Learning approaches but as a result, they focus on architectural difference, as opposed to
performance tradeoff. Our deployment-centric view complements such taxonomies, so as
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 35 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
35 of 42
to provide a measure of the scenarios where traditional methods have practical advantages
over deep learning despite simplicity in terms of their architecture.
Unlike previous reviews where cross-dataset generalization was defined as either a
success or a failure, our systematic quantification of cross-dataset generalization indicates
that generalization degradation has surprising correlations with the complexity of the
algorithm (from which the transformer architectures are derived), transformer architectures
have held up better in terms of relative performance (11.33% decline) although the absolute
accuracy is often lower than for simpler methods on specific datasets. This nuanced finding
implies that architectural sophistication facilitates learning of more transferable features
even though they may not maximise within-dataset accuracy which breaks assumptions
that if one has the highest measure of benchmark performance, this will result in optimal
ability to transfer that performance to new data.
5.3. Limitations of Current Detection Methods
Our systematic analysis shows five basic, pervasive, fundamental limitations that
affect all detection methodologies limiting the effectiveness of their deployment in the real
world necessitating paradigm shifts over incremental improvements.
Dataset Overfitting and Artifact Learning. The regular 10–15% degradation in cross-
dataset performance shows that existing ones majorly learn the dataset-specific compression
type, boundary of the facial region, and signature of the manipulation, and not general-
izeable deepfake features. This limitation is even seen with transformer architectures
intentionally designed for generalization (ADT: 11.33% decline and is a fundamental chal-
lenge for which new training paradigms need to be considered. Methods achieving >
99 of within readiness on datasets years hearty razorback-target attack linked business
interpretative limit 1 (significance p < 0.001) on unseen data (Table 3), performing a main
total to a scaling benched that isn’t a goal? I study a overlapping total. The acuity for this
pattern by methodological category suggests that easiness current supervised learning
paradigms optimizing for dataset specific accuracy approximating with the goal of finding
features in an invariant of manipulation.
Computational Scalability Requirements. While transformer-based methods have
established their superior performance in terms of cross-dataset generalization, the 3–5×
computational burden they impose when compared to CNNs imposes deployment con-
straints for real-time applications, devices constrained in resources, and for large-scale
applications performing content moderation. The marginal increase in accuracy (1–2% in
average) compared to computational increases therefore difference reliquary the viability
of architectural complexity as a universal solution. This trade-off, insofar as its underexplo-
ration in the literature in favor of maximizing accuracy and no context of deployment, is the
case. For example, multimodal approaches such as AVoiD-DF take 60 ms inference time and
are not feasible to accept in real-time video processing (requires < 33 ms per frame when
processing 30 fps videos) although the accuracy score is higher on benchmark datasets.
Temporal Consistency Modeling Shortcomings Research Problems: Despite the LSTM
and spatiotemporal approaches, there are existing approaches that fail to suitably represent
the temporal artifacts of longer video sequences. The excellent performance of the semantic
temporal analysis by [48] that achieved 100% DFDC accuracy by detecting emotional conti-
nuity, seems to indicate superiority of explicit temporal modelling over frame-independent
or short-sequence approaches. However, computational costs of dense temporal processing
across full video sequences place a limit on scale and a trade-off is created between temporal
robustness and efficiency.
Adversarial Vulnerability: As known from the work of Cao and Gong, existing detec-
tors suffer from adversarial attacks of such mechanisms as Gaussian noise perturbations,
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 36 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
36 of 42
backdoor attacks, and targeted adversarial examples. Our review shows very little regard
to adversarial robustness in methods evaluated, with only 3 out of 74 performed this adver-
sarial training/evaluation. This gap makes deployed systems against human adversarial
manipulation between organic deepfake generation a great security vulnerability.
Multimodal Integration Challenges: While multimodal approaches are shown to
provide performance improvements taking advantage of the existence of audio-visual in-
consistencies, they come with synchronization needs, computational overhead and depend
on the completeness of the multimodal data available. There are many real-world scenarios
involving visual only content (static images, muted videos), which limit the use of multi-
modal detectors although they perform better on audio-visual benchmarks. The field does
not have unified frameworks to ensure the advantages of multimodal when complete data
exists and graceful degradation to strong unimodal operation when modalities are missing.
5.4. Adversarial Attacks on Deepfake Detectors
As the technology for detection has improved, assaults on the detectors have become
an important security issue. Attackers can make deepfakes undetectable through a number
of different methods. Gaussian Noise: The noise perturbations in the form of perceptible
random variations added to degrade the detector accuracy without deteriorating the
visual quality. Backdoor attacks in which known or unknown attackers intentionally
insert disruptive triggers in training data, so that that the detectors misclassify particular
manipulated samples. Adaptive adversarial examples are crafted with the sole purpose of
exploiting detection architectures weaknesses.
Our analysis shows that of the 74 reviewed studies, only 3 studies (4%) explicitly
address adversarial robustness before the significant gap in a magazine’s literature. Cao and
Gong showed that detectors that perform 94–99% accurately under controlled conditions
that would be subject to adversarial attacks, which shows that there is a difference between
the benchmark performance and actual security. This vulnerability is especially worrying
when it comes to use in applications that are security critical and where attackers are
actively working to circumvent the detection systems.
Future research will need to focus on the robustness to adversarial attacks as well as
the accuracy. Promising directions include certified defense mechanisms offering provable
bounds of robustness, adversarial training against various kinds of attacks, and ensem-
ble approaches adding upsetting principles for easier attacks to be made. Standardized
methods of evaluation in an adversarial way must become the standard for the detection
method validation.
5.5. Future Research Directions and Recommendations
Based on limitations identified and performance gaps identified, we propose 7 critical
research directions for improving deepfake detection capabilities in order to make them
practically deployable.
1. Generalization-Focused Training Paradigms: The cross-dataset degradation must
be performed in a systematic way, so that the training methodologies needed to be specifi-
cally geared toward generalization instead of in-dataset accuracy. Promising approaches
are: (a) meta-learning frameworks where training is done on distribution shifts, not
on fixed datasets, learning to adapt these into previously unseen manipulation types;
(b) domain adaptation approaches which make use of unlabeled target domain data,
and bridge distribution gaps; (c) disentangled representation learning for separating
content-specific features from manipulation artifacts in order to learn invariant charac-
teristics; and (d) contrastive learning which enforces that each manipulation method is
consistent. Future work should therefore focus optimizing cross dataset AUC rather than
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 37 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
37 of 42
within dataset accuracy as the main optimization goal, with benchmarks that provide
advantages for consistent performance under various conditions for evaluation.
2. Computational Efficiency through Neural Architecture Search: The transformer
accuracy efficiency trade-off requires systematic search of architecture design space of
performance and computational cost. Neural architecture search (NAS) specifically focused
on the deployment constraints (inference time < 10 ms, parameters < 50 M) could help
find Pareto-optimal architectures not suitable for manual design. The Mixture-of-Experts
approach shows that selective computation can preserve the benefits of transformers while
mitigating the overhead, it is worth further research on the conditional computation and
adaptive inference mechanism.
3. Temporal Consistency Modeling the Scale: Superior performance of semantic
temporal analysis points to possibilities in explicit temporal consistency modeling. Research
should explore the following: (a) efficient temporal attention mechanisms that cover the
full video sequence and not on the short clips; (b) hierarchical temporal modeling at
different timescales (frame, shot, scene) modeling both local and global inconsistencies; and
(c) enforcement of physical constraints according to facial biomechanics, audio-visual
physics and lighting consistency. Lightweight temporal encoder would be able to offer
temporal robustness without LSTM Cmp cost.
4. Unified Multimodal-Unimodal Frameworks: Current multimodal approaches work
well with audio-visual data but are unable to handle visual-only data. Future architectures
should degrade gracefully if modalities are absent, so that they provide reasonable dys-
functionality with unimodal inputs and superior accuracy if complete multimodal data is
made available. Self-supervised pre-training with a some of diverse modality combinations
might help to develop flexible deployment for different data availability cases.
5. Adversarial Robustness With the Power of Defensibility: Critical security appli-
cations need adversarial robustness guarantees that are currently lacking in detection
techniques. Research objectives should consider: (a) certified defense mechanisms with
provable robustness bounds against worst case perturbations; (b) adversarial learning
adversarial have learned from diverse kinds of attacks such as noise perturbations, back
door, and adaptive adversarial examples; and (c) ensemble approaches are approaches that
combine detection principles that are complementary to each other rendering the attack
more difficult.Standardized adversarial evaluation benchmarks would be available for
systematic evaluation of robustness for methods.
6. Interpretable detection and explainable detection: Forensic and legal applications
require interpretable detections in addition to binary classification scores Attention Visual-
ization Attribution methods Counterfactual explanations identifying specific. manipulation
regions add trust and allow for human verification; Research should create explanation
methods keeping the balance between the two points: maintaining accuracy and providing
actionable forensic evidence, (potentially including the use of interpretability integrated
into architecture, rather than explainability methods post-hoc).
7. Standardized Evaluation Protocol(s): Inconsistent evaluation protocols make it
difficult to compare study results from one study to another. Standardized evaluation
should include and impose: (a) mandatory cross-dataset testing of the models on Face-
Forensics++, DFDC and Celeb-DF with consistent splits and preprocessing; (b) reporting of
inference time, number of parameters and computation requirements as well as accuracy
metrics; (c) evaluation for adversarial robustness against standardized attack protocols;
(d) testing for statistical significance instead of reporting the performance of one run, cur-
rently done in only 30%; and (e) code and model release for publication in order to allow for
reproducibility, currently done in only 30%. Benchmark committees could set and enforce
such standards in the form of publication requirements.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 38 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
38 of 42
By addressing these directions of research in a systematic manner, the research di-
rection could advance toward developing detection systems with the combined goals of
high detection accuracy, cross-dataset generalization, computational efficiency, adversarial
robustness, and interpretability required for the reliable deployment in the real world.
The movement from optimizing accuracy to all-around assessment of dimensions of this
kind is the paradigm shift required for impacting practical use.
6. Conclusions
This summary of all studies published between 2018–2025 on deepfake detection indi-
cates the existence of fundamental trade-offs between detection accuracy, computational
efficiency and cross-dataset generalization determining the validity of the practical imple-
mentation. While transformer-based architectures have a better tendency for cross-dataset
generalization (11.33% drop in performance compared to CNNs > 15%) they ask for the
price of 3–5× more. Challenging the assumptions of deep learning, older machine learning
algorithms such as Random Forest achieve comparable results to deep learning algorithms
(99.64% accuracy on DFDC) with very few computational demands. However, systematic
performance deformation across different methodologies by 10–15% suggests systematic
large-scale result for approach. may indicate that the effective approaches are learning to
dataset specific artefacts, rather generalizable deepfake characteristics.
The second thing that the field needs to move toward is not just pure optimization of
accuracy, but going towards evaluation framework that really covers the generalization ca-
pabilities, the computational limitations, the adversarial aspects, and what kind of practical
constraint is involved with deployment. Future research In future, future studies should
focus on: (1) Generalization-focused training paradigm using meta-learning and domain-
adaptation; (2) Neural architecture searching based on deployment restrictions; (3) Efficient
temporal consistence modeling at scale; (4) Unified multi-modal unimodal frameworks;
(5) Proper adversarial-robustness through defensive design; (6) Interpretable possibility
detection for forensic applications; and (7) Different cross-dataset evaluation protocol.
Combating deepfakes effectively requires multidisciplinary collaboration that goes be-
yond what the technical solutions available to combat deepfakes can deliver, encompassing
regulation and media literacy programmes as well as guidelines on the ethics of their use.
Only through coordinated work on the part of researchers, policymakers, and technology
practitioners, can we start to build strong defenses against the wrongful use of generative
AI technologies and leave normative ways of using generative AI technologies standing-
by keeping some of these generative AI technologies out of our lives. The way forward
requires being balanced between innovation in areas of detection capability and the reality
of deployment and ensuring that research advancements result in real-world deployments
to protect digital media authenticity reliably.
Author Contributions: This work presents, A.R., A.B. and A.A. conceived the initial idea. M.I.M.
and Z.A.A. established the methodological strategy. U.F., M.I.M. and Z.A.A. formulated the software
component. A.R. and A.B. oversaw the validation process. A.B. and A.R. prepared the initial draft.
U.F., A.A., Z.A.A. and T.A.J. contributed to revisions and edits. Z.A.A. and M.I.M. overall supervision.
All authors have reviewed and approved the final manuscript for publication.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: As this is our review paper. No dataset has been used, as it is a
comprehensive review of previous techniques.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 39 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
39 of 42
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
References
1.
Seow, J.; Lim, M.; Phan, R.; Liu, J. A comprehensive overview of Deepfake: Generation, detection, datasets, and opportunities.
Neurocomputing 2022, 513, 351–371. [CrossRef]
2.
Mirsky, Y.; Lee, W. The creation and detection of deepfakes: A survey. ACM Comput. Surv. (CSUR) 2021, 54, 7. [CrossRef]
3.
Hadi, W.; Kadhem, S.; Abbas, A. A survey of deepfakes in terms of deep learning and multimedia forensics. Int. J. Electr. Comput.
Eng. (IJECE) 2022, 12, 4408–4414. [CrossRef]
4.
Malik, A.; Kuribayashi, M.; Abdullahi, S.; Khan, A. DeepFake detection for human face images and videos: A survey. IEEE Access
2022, 10, 18757–18775. [CrossRef]
5.
Tolosana, R.; Romero-Tapiador, S.; Fierrez, J.; Vera-Rodriguez, R. Deepfakes evolution: Analysis of facial regions and fake
detection performance. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Pattern Recognition, Shanghai, China, 15–17 October
2021; pp. 442–456.
6.
Alanazi, S.; Asif, S. Exploring deepfake technology: Creation, consequences and countermeasures. Hum.-Intell. Syst. Integr. 2024,
6, 49–60. [CrossRef]
7.
Lyu, S. DeepFake the menace: Mitigating the negative impacts of AI-generated content. Organ. Cybersecur. J. Pract. Process People
2024, 4, 1–18. [CrossRef]
8.
Naitali, A.; Ridouani, M.; Salahdine, F.; Kaabouch, N. Deepfake attacks: Generation, detection, datasets, challenges, and research
directions. Computers 2023, 12, 216. [CrossRef]
9.
Wang, T.; Liao, X.; Chow, K.; Lin, X.; Wang, Y. Deepfake detection: A comprehensive survey from the reliability perspective.
ACM Comput. Surv. 2024, 57, 58. [CrossRef]
10.
Heidari, A.; Jafari Navimipour, N.; Dag, H.; Unal, M. Deepfake detection using deep learning methods: A systematic and
comprehensive review. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Data Min. Knowl. Discov. 2024, 14, e1520. [CrossRef]
11.
Abbas, F.; Taeihagh, A. Unmasking deepfakes: A systematic review of deepfake detection and generation techniques using
artificial intelligence. Expert Syst. Appl. 2024, 252, 124260. [CrossRef]
12.
Gupta, G.; Raja, K.; Gupta, M.; Jan, T.; Whiteside, S.; Prasad, M. A comprehensive review of deepfake detection using advanced
machine learning and fusion methods. Electronics 2023, 13, 95. [CrossRef]
13.
Deng, J.; Lin, C.; Hu, P.; Shen, C.; Wang, Q.; Li, Q.; Li, Q. Towards benchmarking and evaluating deepfake detection. IEEE Trans.
Dependable Secur. Comput. 2024, 21, 5112–5127. [CrossRef]
14.
Rana, M.S.; Nobi, M.N.; Murali, B.; Sung, A.H. Deepfake Detection: A Systematic Literature Review. IEEE Access 2022,
10, 25494–25513. [CrossRef]
15.
Verdoliva, L. Media forensics and deepfakes: An overview. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Signal Process. 2020, 14, 910–932. [CrossRef]
16.
Li, Y.; Yang, X.; Sun, P.; Qi, H.; Lyu, S. Celeb-DF: A large-scale challenging dataset for deepfake forensics. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Seattle, WA, USA, 14–19 June 2020; pp. 3207–3216.
17.
Dolhansky, B.; Bitton, J.; Pflaum, B.; Lu, J.; Howes, R.; Wang, M.; Ferrer, C. The deepfake detection challenge (dfdc) dataset.
arXiv 2020, arXiv:2006.07397. [CrossRef]
18.
Wang, P.; Liu, K.; Zhou, W.; Zhou, H.; Liu, H.; Zhang, W.; Yu, N. ADT: Anti-deepfake transformer. In Proceedings of the ICASSP
2022—2022 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), Singapore, 22–27 May 2022;
pp. 2899–2903.
19.
Khormali, A.; Yuan, J. DFDT: An end-to-end deepfake detection framework using vision transformer. Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 2953.
[CrossRef]
20.
Nirkin, Y.; Wolf, L.; Keller, Y.; Hassner, T. Deepfake detection based on discrepancies between faces and their context. IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 2021, 44, 6111–6121. [CrossRef]
21.
Guo, Z.; Jia, Z.; Wang, L.; Wang, D.; Yang, G.; Kasabov, N. Constructing new backbone networks via space-frequency interactive
convolution for deepfake detection. IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 2023, 19, 401–413. [CrossRef]
22.
Wang, T.; Cheng, H.; Chow, K.; Nie, L. Deep convolutional pooling transformer for deepfake detection. ACM Trans. Multimed.
Comput. Commun. Appl. 2023, 19, 1–20. [CrossRef]
23.
Zhao, H.; Zhou, W.; Chen, D.; Wei, T.; Zhang, W.; Yu, N. Multi-attentional deepfake detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Nashville, TN, USA, 19–25 June 2021; pp. 2185–2194.
24.
Yang, W.; Zhou, X.; Chen, Z.; Guo, B.; Ba, Z.; Xia, Z.; Cao, X.; Ren, K. Avoid-df: Audio-visual joint learning for detecting deepfake.
IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 2023, 18, 2015–2029. [CrossRef]
25.
Waseem, S.; Abu-Bakar, S.; Omar, Z.; Ahmed, B.; Baloch, S. A multi-color spatio-temporal approach for detecting deepfake. In
Proceedings of the 2022 12th International Conference on Pattern Recognition Systems (ICPRS), Saint-Etienne, France, 7–10 June
2022; pp. 1–5.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 40 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
40 of 42
26.
Rossler, A.; Cozzolino, D.; Verdoliva, L.; Riess, C.; Thies, J.; Nießner, M. FaceForensics++: Learning to detect manipulated facial
images. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), Seoul, Republic of Korea, 27 October–2
November 2019; pp. 1–11.
27.
Jayakumar, K.; Skandhakumar, N. A visually interpretable forensic deepfake detection tool using anchors. In Proceedings of
the 2022 7th International Conference on Information Technology Research (ICITR), Moratuwa, Sri Lanka, 7–8 December 2022;
pp. 1–6.
28.
Zou, M.; Yu, B.; Zhan, Y.; Lyu, S.; Ma, K. Semantics-oriented multitask learning for DeepFake detection: A joint embedding
approach. IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol. 2025, 35, 9950–9963. [CrossRef]
29.
Cozzolino, D.; Pianese, A.; Nießner, M.; Verdoliva, L. Audio-visual person-of-interest deepfake detection. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 18–22 June 2023; pp. 943–952.
30.
Pham, M.; Huynh, T.; Nguyen, T.; Nguyen, T.; Nguyen, T.; Jo, J.; Yin, H.; Hung Nguyen, Q. A dual benchmarking study of facial
forgery and facial forensics. CAAI Trans. Intell. Technol. 2024, 9, 1377–1397. [CrossRef]
31.
Le, B.; Kim, J.; Woo, S.; Moore, K.; Abuadbba, A.; Tariq, S. SoK: Systematization and Benchmarking of Deepfake Detectors in a
Unified Framework. arXiv 2024, arXiv:2401.04364.
32.
Shahzad, S.; Hashmi, A.; Peng, Y.; Tsao, Y.; Wang, H. How good is ChatGPT at audiovisual deepfake detection: A comparative
study of ChatGPT, AI models and human perception. arXiv 2024, arXiv:2411.09266. [CrossRef]
33.
Rana, M.; Sung, A. Deepfake detection: A tutorial. In Proceedings of the 9th ACM International Workshop on Security and
Privacy Analytics, Charlotte, NC, USA, 26 April 2023; pp. 55–56.
34.
Cao, X.; Gong, N. Understanding the security of deepfake detection. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Digital
Forensics and Cyber Crime, Singapore, 7–9 December 2021; pp. 360–378.
35.
Tolosana, R.; Vera-Rodriguez, R.; Fierrez, J.; Morales, A.; Ortega-Garcia, J. Deepfakes and beyond: A survey of face manipulation
and fake detection. Inf. Fusion 2020, 64, 131–148. [CrossRef]
36.
Masood, M.; Nawaz, M.; Malik, K.M.; Javed, A.; Irtaza, A.; Malik, H. Deepfakes generation and detection: State-of-the-art, open
challenges, countermeasures, and way forward. Appl. Intell. 2023, 53, 3974–4026. [CrossRef]
37.
Kaur, A.; Noori Hoshyar, A.; Saikrishna, V.; Firmin, S.; Xia, F. Deepfake video detection: Challenges and opportunities. Artif. Intell.
Rev. 2024, 57, 159. [CrossRef]
38.
Coccomini, D.; Caldelli, R.; Falchi, F.; Gennaro, C.; Amato, G. Cross-forgery analysis of vision transformers and cnns for deepfake
image detection. In Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Multimedia AI Against Disinformation, Newark, NJ, USA,
27–30 June 2022; pp. 52–58.
39.
Dong, X.; Bao, J.; Chen, D.; Zhang, T.; Zhang, W.; Yu, N.; Chen, D.; Wen, F.; Guo, B. Protecting celebrities from deepfake with
identity consistency transformer. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
New Orleans, LA, USA, 18–24 June 2022; pp. 9468–9478.
40.
Salvi, D.; Liu, H.; Mandelli, S.; Bestagini, P.; Zhou, W.; Zhang, W.; Tubaro, S. A robust approach to multimodal deepfake detection.
J. Imaging 2023, 9, 122. [CrossRef]
41.
Mathews, S.; Trivedi, S.; House, A.; Povolny, S.; Fralick, C. An explainable deepfake detection framework on a novel unconstrained
dataset. Complex Intell. Syst. 2023, 9, 4425–4437. [CrossRef]
42.
Amin, M.; Hu, Y.; She, H.; Li, J.; Guan, Y.; Amin, M. Exposing deepfake frames through spectral analysis of color channels in
frequency domain. In Proceedings of the 2023 11th International Workshop on Biometrics and Forensics (IWBF), Barcelona, Spain,
19–20 April 2023; pp. 1–6.
43.
Groh, M.; Epstein, Z.; Firestone, C.; Picard, R. Deepfake detection by human crowds, machines, and machine-informed crowds.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2022, 119, e2110013119. [CrossRef]
44.
Nguyen, H.H.; Fang, F.; Yamagishi, J.; Echizen, I. Multi-task learning for detecting and segmenting manipulated facial images
and videos. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Biometrics Theory, Applications and Systems (BTAS), Tampa,
FL, USA, 23–26 September 2019; pp. 1–8.
45.
Sandotra, N.; Arora, B. A comprehensive evaluation of feature-based AI techniques for deepfake detection. Neural Comput. Appl.
2024, 36, 3859–3887. [CrossRef]
46.
Khalil, S.; Youssef, S.; Saleh, S. A multi-layer capsule-based forensics model for fake detection of digital visual media. In
Proceedings of the 2020 International Conference on Communications, Signal Processing, and Their Applications (ICCSPA),
Sharjah, United Arab Emirates, 16–18 March 2021; pp. 1–6.
47.
Castillo Camacho, I.; Wang, K. A comprehensive review of deep-learning-based methods for image forensics. J. Imaging 2021, 7, 69.
[CrossRef]
48.
Hosler, B.; Salvi, D.; Murray, A.; Antonacci, F.; Bestagini, P.; Tubaro, S.; Stamm, M. Do deepfakes feel emotions? A semantic
approach to detecting deepfakes via emotional inconsistencies. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, Nashville, TN, USA, 19–25 June 2021; pp. 1013–1022.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 41 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
41 of 42
49.
Ritter, P.; Lucian, D.; Chowanda, A. Others Comparative Analysis and Evaluation of CNN Models for Deepfake Detection. In
Proceedings of the 2023 4th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Data Sciences (AiDAS), Ipoh, Malaysia, 6–7
September 2023; pp. 250–255.
50.
Nguyen, H.; Yamagishi, J.; Echizen, I. Exploring self-supervised vision transformers for deepfake detection: A comparative
analysis. In Proceedings of the 2024 IEEE International Joint Conference on Biometrics (IJCB), Buffalo, NY, USA, 15–18 September
2024; pp. 1–10.
51.
Tran, V.; Kwon, S.; Lee, S.; Le, H.; Kwon, K. Generalization of forgery detection with meta deepfake detection model. IEEE Access
2022, 11, 535–546. [CrossRef]
52.
Chollet, F. Xception: Deep learning with depthwise separable convolutions. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, Honolulu, HI, USA, 21–26 July 2017; pp. 1251–1258.
53.
Xu, Y.; Raja, K.; Verdoliva, L.; Pedersen, M. Learning pairwise interaction for generalizable deepfake detection. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, Waikoloa, HI, USA, 3–7 January 2023; pp. 672–682.
54.
Thing, V. Deepfake detection with deep learning: Convolutional neural networks versus transformers. In Proceedings of the 2023
IEEE International Conference on Cyber Security and Resilience (CSR), Venice, Italy, 31 July–2 August 2023; pp. 246–253.
55.
Kamat, S.; Agarwal, S.; Darrell, T.; Rohrbach, A. Revisiting generalizability in deepfake detection: Improving metrics and
stabilizing transfer. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, Paris, France, 4–6 October
2023; pp. 426–435.
56.
¸Stefan, L.; Stanciu, D.; Dogariu, M.; Constantin, M.; Jitaru, A.; Ionescu, B. Deepfake Sentry: Harnessing Ensemble Intelligence for
Resilient Detection and Generalisation. arXiv 2024, arXiv:2404.00114. [CrossRef]
57.
Korshunov, P.; Marcel, S. Deepfakes: A New Threat to Face Recognition? Assessment and Detection. arXiv 2018, arXiv:1812.08685.
[CrossRef]
58.
Méreur, A.; Mallet, A.; Cogranne, R.; Kuribayashi, M. Forensics Analysis of Residual Noise Texture in Digital Images for Detection
of Deepfake. In Proceedings of the 2025 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP),
Hyderabad, India, 6–11 April 2025; pp. 1–5.
59.
Almutairi, Z.; Elgibreen, H. A Review of Modern Audio Deepfake Detection Methods: Challenges and Future Directions.
Algorithms 2022, 15, 155. [CrossRef]
60.
Setyaningrum, A.; Saputro, A. Deepfake Video Classification Using Random Forest and Stochastic Gradient Descent with Triplet
Loss Approach Algorithm. In Proceedings of the 2024 12th International Conference on Cyber And IT Service Management
(CITSM), Batam, Indonesia, 3–4 October 2024; pp. 1–6.
61.
Giatsoglou, N.; Papadopoulos, S.; Kompatsiaris, I. Investigation of Ensemble Methods for the Detection of Deepfake Face
Manipulations. arXiv 2023, arXiv:2304.07395. [CrossRef]
62.
Mohan, C.; Prabhakar, P.; Karthik, N.; Kumar, P.; Rithwik, K.; Prabhas, M. Enhanced Deepfake Detection on Social Media:
Applying CountVectorizer and Random Forest for Optimal Tweet Classification. Int. J. Res. Eng. IT Soc. Sci. 2024, 14, 124–132.
63.
Gujjar, M.; Munir, K.; Amjad, M.; Rehman, A.; Bermak, A. Unmasking the Fake: Machine Learning Approach for Deepfake Voice
Detection. IEEE Access 2024, 12, 197442–197453. [CrossRef]
64.
Alzurfi, N.; Altaei, M. A Hybrid Model of Deep Learning and Machine Learning Methods to Detect Deepfake Videos. Iraqi J. Sci.
2025, 66, 736–750. [CrossRef]
65.
Vashistha, M.; Jain, S.; Pandey, S.; Pradhan, A.; Tarwani, S. A Comparative Analysis of Machine Learning and Deep Learning
Approaches in Deepfake Detection. In Proceedings of the 2024 IEEE Region 10 Symposium (TENSYMP), New Delhi, India, 27–29
September 2024; pp. 1–8.
66.
Atas, S.; Karakose, M. A New Approach to in Ensemble Method for Deepfake Detection. In Proceedings of the 2023 4th
International Conference on Data Analytics for Business And Industry (ICDABI), Virtual, 25–26 October 2023; pp. 201–204.
67.
Yang, M.; Qi, B.; Ma, R.; Xian, Y.; Ma, B. HashShield: A Robust DeepFake Forensic Framework with Separable Perceptual Hashing.
IEEE Signal Process. Lett. 2025, 32, 1186–1190. [CrossRef]
68.
Guarnera, L.; Giudice, O.; Battiato, S. Deepfake detection by analyzing convolutional traces. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, Seattle, WA, USA, 14–19 June 2020; pp. 666–667.
69.
Li, G.; Zhao, X.; Cao, Y.; Pei, P.; Li, J.; Zhang, Z. FMFCC-V: An Asian large-scale challenging dataset for deepfake detection. In
Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Workshop on Information Hiding and Multimedia Security, San Jose, CA, USA, 27–28 June 2022;
pp. 7–18.
70.
Convertini, V.; Impedovo, D.; Lopez, U.; Pirlo, G.; Sterlicchio, G. Discrete Fourier Transform in Unmasking Deepfake Images: A
Comparative Study of StyleGAN Creations. Information 2024, 15, 711. [CrossRef]
71.
Ni, Y.; Zeng, W.; Xia, P.; Tan, R. A Deepfake Detection Algorithm Based on Fourier Transform of Biological Signal. Comput. Mater.
Contin. 2024, 79, 5295. [CrossRef]
72.
Biswas, A.; Bhattacharya, D.; Kumar, K. Others Deepfake detection using 3d-xception net with discrete fourier transformation.
J. Inf. Syst. Telecommun. (JIST) 2021, 3, 161.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068


--- PAGE 42 ---

AI 2026, 7, 68
42 of 42
73.
Zhang, Y.; Yu, Z.; Wang, T.; Huang, X.; Shen, L.; Gao, Z.; Ren, J. Genface: A large-scale fine-grained face forgery benchmark and
cross appearance-edge learning. IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 2024, 19, 8559–8572.
74.
Wolter, M.; Blanke, F.; Heese, R.; Garcke, J. Wavelet-packets for deepfake image analysis and detection. Mach. Learn. 2022,
111, 4295–4327. [CrossRef]
75.
Younus, M.; Hasan, T. Effective and fast deepfake detection method based on haar wavelet transform. In Proceedings of the 2020
International Conference on Computer Science and Software Engineering (CSASE), Duhok, Iraq, 16–18 April 2020; pp. 186–190.
76.
Uddin, M.; Fu, Z.; Zhang, X. Deepfake face detection via multi-level discrete wavelet transform and vision transformer. Vis.
Comput. 2025, 41, 7049–7061. [CrossRef]
77.
Khan, M.; Mir, H.; Al Shargie, F.; Tariq, U.; Dhall, A.; Naeem, S.; Khan, M.; Al Nashash, H. Discrimination of Real and Deep Fake
Videos using EEG Signals. In Proceedings of the 2024 46th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine
and Biology Society (EMBC), Orlando, FL, USA, 15–19 July 2024; pp. 1–4.
78.
Li, L.; Dong, F.; Zhang, S. Manifold regularized deep canonical variate analysis with interpretable attribute guidance for
three-phase flow process monitoring. Expert Syst. Appl. 2024, 251, 124015. [CrossRef]
79.
Miao, C.; Tan, Z.; Chu, Q.; Liu, H.; Hu, H.; Yu, N. F 2 trans: High-frequency fine-grained transformer for face forgery detection.
IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 2023, 18, 1039–1051. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ai7020068
