

--- PAGE 1 ---

2024 Second International Conference on Emerging Trends in Information Technology and Engineering (ICETITE) 
 
1 
 
979-8-3503-2820-2/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE 
A Lightweight CNN for Efficient Deepfake 
Detection of Low-resolution Images in Frequency 
Domain 
 Sabareshwar D  
 School of Computer Science and 
Engineering  
Vellore Institute of Technology  
Vellore, Tamilnadu 
sabaresh.d12@gmail.com 
 Dr. Varalakshmi M 
School of Computer Science and 
Engineering  
Vellore Institute of Technology  
Vellore, Tamilnadu 
mvaralakshmi@vit.ac.in
Raghul S 
School of Computer Science and 
Engineering  
Vellore Institute of Technology  
Vellore, Tamilnadu 
raghulmullai@gmail.com 
 Peer Mohamed P U 
CapitalOne 
San Francisco, USA 
pupeer@gmail.com
Shawn Ravi 
School of Computer Science and 
Engineering  
Vellore Institute of Technology  
Vellore, Tamilnadu 
shawn.ravi.sr@gmail.com 
Abstract— Deepfake detection in frequency domain is 
extensively explored for two reasons – artifacts generated by the 
up-sampling layer of Generative Adversarial Networks are more 
prominent in the frequency domain and some image processing 
tasks are simpler and efficient in this domain. Traditional 
convolutional neural networks outperform the machine learning 
models for their ability to detect deepfakes of low-resolution 
images also. But these networks involve numerous trainable 
parameters resulting in huge computation cost, time and high 
memory requirements. This paper presents a lightweight 
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) architecture that is 
optimized for efficient deepfake detection of low-resolution 
images in the frequency domain. The proposed model achieves 
almost the same accuracy as that of the traditional network but 
with the parameter requirement reduced by 92%.  This renders 
the model suitable for use in memory-constrained and power-
constrained environments such as mobile devices and other 
embedded systems.  
Keywords—Deepfake detection, frequency domain, pixel 
domain, lightweight CNN, depthwise separable convolution 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The emergence of Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) 
that can generate realistic synthetic data is considered a 
milestone in the advancement of machine learning and deep 
learning models, for its ability to surpass the creative thinking 
of humans. Interesting applications of GAN such as 
generating new patterns for the fashion industry, composing 
music and generating images from text account for its 
widespread popularity. Deepfakes are digitally manipulated 
visual or audio content to replace the likeness of one person 
with that of another and Deepfake technology leverages high- 
end systems and complex machine learning algorithms to co-
create such convincing fake artistic contents which are 
indistinguishable from the real ones. However, the rapid 
growth of this technology has raised concerns regarding the 
potential for misuse and exploitation. The technology is being 
used to impersonate celebrities and spread fake news, commit 
financial fraudulence, perform election manipulation, 
identity theft, scams and hoaxes. The tremendous expansion 
of social media has amplified the adverse effects of deepfake- 
based cybercrimes.  
 
The potential misuse of deepfakes pose a growing threat to 
democracy, privacy and social security. Researchers, domain 
experts and policy makers work together to develop effective 
solutions to combat deepfake threats. Deepfake detection is 
one such solution that aims to develop techniques and tools to 
identify and distinguish deepfakes from real videos or images. 
This is important because deepfakes can be used to spread 
false information, demean individuals, and mislead public 
opinion.  
Detecting deepfakes requires a combination of technical 
expertise, knowledge of machine learning algorithms, and 
access to large datasets of both real and fake videos or 
images. Owing to the fact that a few image processing 
operations are simpler and more efficient when applied in the 
frequency domain, some studies focus on doing deepfake 
detection in the frequency domain. Fig. 1 depicts the 
difference between authentic images and the fake images 
generated using deep neural networks and Fig.2 shows the 
representation of the real and fake images in different 
spectrums. The power spectrum is a 2D array of real-valued 
numbers that represents the strength of the frequency 
components. The frequency domain representation of a signal 
carries information about the signal's amplitude and phase at 
each frequency. 
 
 
Fig. 1 Differences between Real and Fake Images (a) Real 
(b) Fake 
2024 Second International Conference on Emerging Trends in Information Technology and Engineering (ICETITE) | 979-8-3503-2820-2/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/IC-ETITE58242.2024.10493406
Authorized licensed use limited to: OREGON STATE UNIV. Downloaded on September 18,2026 at 10:32:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- PAGE 2 ---

2 
 
 
Fig. 2 Real and Fake Images in Different Spectrums 
 
Existing literature demonstrates that in the frequency domain, 
traditional machine learning models are sufficient to 
successfully distinguish between authentic and fake images, 
for high resolution images; however, they are not efficient for 
low resolution images. Hence, it is necessary to build a robust 
image classifier using powerful neural networks such as CNN 
to accurately detect the artifacts left by the deep generative 
models. Recent studies focus on training convolutional neural 
networks in frequency domain to produce better results for 
low-resolution images too. But CNN incur excessive 
parameters resulting in huge computation costs, time and 
high memory requirements. This paper proposes and 
implements a lightweight CNN to make possible, the 
deployment of CNN on small devices. It requires fewer 
parameters, still without comprising the accuracy.  
II. RELATED WORKS 
In recent years, deep learning has made remarkable progress 
in every domain ranging from environmental modelling 
[1][2][3] to computer vision and robotics. Furthermore, 
digital face photos and video modification are of particular 
interest since they make use of the capabilities of GANs. 
Studies show that deep fakes are the outcome of Generative 
Adversarial Networks (GANs), which are two artificial 
neural networks that collaborate to produce a compelling 
realistic like media e.g., photos and videos [4],[5]. The 
Generative Adversarial Network is capable of producing a 
new portrait that approximates all thousands of photos it has 
been trained on earlier, without being an exact copy of any of 
them. This is achieved by utilizing two networks namely the 
generator and discriminator networks that are calibrated on 
the same dataset of pictures, video recordings, or audios. The 
first network attempts to generate new samples that are good 
enough to fool the second network, which works to determine 
whether the new media it sees is real.  Different algorithms 
are used for the generation and detection of deepfakes [6]-[8].  
Deepfakes creation methods have some challenges such as 
identity 
translation, 
spatial 
inconsistencies, 
temporal 
inconsistencies and more. According to [9], some artifacts are 
left by the network whilst creation which may not be visible 
to the naked eye but can be detected by image forensics and 
machine 
learning. 
Recent 
studies 
exploit 
these 
inconsistencies to detect the deepfakes successfully. 
Furthermore, Tariq, S et al. [10] and Ganiyusufoglu, I. et al 
[11] were able to detect a deep fake media from a genuine 
one from behavioral aspects such as unusual head poses, 
mouth movement, unnatural blinking rate etc. As suggested 
in [12], video classification approaches can be used to take 
advantage of 3D input for the deepfake classification 
challenge. Except for Region-based Convolutional Neural 
Network (RCN), all of the convolutional networks they tested 
were pre-trained using the Kinetics dataset, a large-scale 
video categorization dataset. The methods were tested using 
video snippets of varying lengths. The authors chose the 
Celeb-DF (v2) dataset for their work, which contains 590 real 
films gathered from YouTube and 5639 comparable high-
quality synthesized movies. Celeb-DF was chosen since it has 
shown to be a complex and challenging dataset for existing 
deepfake detection systems due to the lack of discernible 
visual artifacts in synthesized videos. Lewis, J. K et al. [13] 
go even a step further by including spectral information along 
with spatial and temporal data and propose a novel 
multileveled complex CNN-LSTM (Long Short-Term 
Memory) pipeline to detect Deepfakes. By utilizing both 
visual and audio artifacts, they were able to achieve high 
detection accuracy. As demonstrated in [14], a basic classifier 
following the frequency domain analysis of the images 
provides good accuracy even with a few labeled data and in 
unsupervised settings. Another study based on using the 
frequency spectrum to detect deepfakes has also shown 99% 
accuracy 
[15]. 
Another 
study 
by 
Frank, 
J., [16] 
experimentally proves that DCT transformed images are fully 
linearly separable, in contrast to classification on pixel 
domains that require neural networks. Kohli, A., & Gupta, A 
[17] have shown good results by converting the faces 
extracted from the videos to frequency domain and then 
feeding them to a 3-layered CNN to detect deepfakes. 
In another unique approach, face manipulation is divided into 
face 
replacement 
and 
face 
reenactment, 
and 
face 
manipulation detection is treated as a three-classification 
problem [18]. They proposed the three-classification face 
manipulation detection technique (TFMD) based on 
attentional feature decomposition, as well as a novel face 
forgery feature representation.. As suggested in [19], a 
biometric-based forensic technique can be efficiently used for 
detecting deep face-swap impersonations.  Jung, T et al. [20] 
suggested an approach called Deep Vision that analyses eye 
blinks that are continually repeated in a very short period of 
time; Deep Vision is used as a measure to validate an 
anomaly based on the period, repeated number, and expired 
eye blink time. In seven out of eight different types of videos, 
their proposed methodology was able to correctly identify 
deepfakes (87.5% accuracy rate).  
Deepfake techniques can only create face images with 
defined dimensions and low quality and these images must be 
further altered and blurred to match the original video's faces. 
This additive blur and ROI transformations leave unique 
artifacts in the generated deepfake movies, that may be 
efficiently recorded by spotting discrepancies between the 
Region of Interest (ROI) and the remainder of the image 
using Haar Wavelet transformation, that helps for deepfake 
detection [21].  
 
Authorized licensed use limited to: OREGON STATE UNIV. Downloaded on September 18,2026 at 10:32:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- PAGE 3 ---

3 
 
III. METHODOLOGY 
A. Dataset Description 
Two different datasets are used : Flickr-Faces-High 
Quality dataset (FFHQ) consisting of 70000 images and 
Deepfake Detection dataset by Google consisting of 10000 
real and fake images which are divided in the ratio 80:20 for 
training and testing, for achieving optimal results. 
B. System Archtiecture 
The proposed framework consists of two modules -
Preprocessing and Deepfake detection. 
 
a) Preprocessing 
A robust pre-processing pipeline is employed to properly 
convert the videos into frequency data needed by the CNN. 
The pipeline is further divided into two phases – Face 
extraction and Transformation to frequency domain.  Fig. 3 
gives the schematic of the two phases of the preprocessing 
pipeline. 
In the face extraction phase, the video is split into frames, and 
around 1/3 of frames per second are used to avoid redundant 
data. The frames are extracted using the ffmpeg tool, and then 
a face-recognition module, dllib is used to detect faces.  
In the second phase, the detected faces are converted into the 
frequency domain using the 2D Global Discrete Cosine 
Transform (2D-GDCT). The 2D DCT is applied to a 256x256 
image by first dividing it into 8x8 blocks, and each block is 
transformed using the 2D DCT to produce 64 DCT 
coefficients. The DCT coefficients that represent the 
frequency content of the image are stored in a compact and 
efficient way, in the form of a matrix, with the low frequency 
components in the upper left corner and the high frequency 
components in the lower right corner. Normalization is then 
performed to rescale the data to the range [0,1]. 
 
Fig. 3 Pre-processing (Feature Extraction and Domain 
Transformation) 
Global Discrete Cosine Transform (GDCT) calculation is as 
follows. 
 
 
 
b) Deepfake Detection 
Traditional machine learning models fail to accurately 
distinguish between real and fake images of low resolution. 
CNN is a robust solution that works for both low and high 
resolution. The proposed architecture is a lightweight CNN 
optimized to work in small devices. It is implemented by  
replacing the normal convolutional layers with depthwise 
convolutions, and reducing the number of fully connected 
units carefully without much loss in accuracy score.  
Depthwise Separable Convolution 
Depthwise separable convolution is a type of convolutional 
neural network layer that consists of two consecutive layers - 
depth wise convolution and pointwise convolution. 
In a traditional convolutional layer, the convolution is 
performed over the entire input volume, which includes all 
the input channels, using a filter that has a depth equal to the 
number of input channels. This can be computationally 
expensive, especially when dealing with large input volumes.  
In a depthwise convolution, the convolution operation is 
performed separately for each input channel, using a filter 
that has a depth of one. This means that each filter is 
responsible for convolving only one channel of the input 
volume. This reduces the number of parameters required and 
makes the computation more efficient. After the depthwise 
convolution layer, a pointwise convolution layer is added to 
combine the output of the depthwise convolution layer. In a 
pointwise convolution, a 1x1 convolution is applied to the 
output of the depthwise convolution, to combine the filtered 
channels and produce the final output. This pointwise 
convolution helps to preserve the non-linearity of the model. 
 
Depthwise separable convolution is obtained by combining 
the depthwise convolution and pointwise convolution layers. 
It is a more efficient alternative to traditional convolutional  
layers and has been used in many lightweight CNN 
architectures.  
The proposed method uses a convolutional neural network  to 
recognize deepfake faces in the target video. It is made up of 
six layers as illustrated in Fig. 4 - a depthwise separable 
convolutional layer, activation layer, additional pooling 
layer, Dropout Layer, Batch Normalization Layer and a fully 
connected layer. The feature extraction is handled by the 
convolutional, activation and pooling layers, while the fully 
connected layer transfers extracted features into classification 
output. As shown in Fig. 5, majority voting is applied to the 
results of the convolution network to classify the image into 
real or fake. 
 
  
Authorized licensed use limited to: OREGON STATE UNIV. Downloaded on September 18,2026 at 10:32:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- PAGE 4 ---

4 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4 CNN with Depthwise Separable Convolution Layers 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5: Detection stage [Framewise Detection and Majority 
Voting] 
C. Experimental Setup 
The proposed model is implemented in Python and executed 
in a Dell Precision T7820 workstation configured with Intel 
Xeon processor, 96 GB RAM, and Nvidia Quadro RTX5000 
graphics card.  
From the Keras library, Conv2D layers with various filters 
such as 16, 32, 64,128, and 256 are employed, with each 
followed by a BatchNormalization layer, a MaxPooling layer 
and a DepthwiseConv2D layer. At last, a GlobalAverage 
Pooling2D layer and a Dense layer are added. A learning rate 
of 0.0005 and Adam optimizer are used. 
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Traditional machine learning algorithms such as Logistic 
Regression, Support Vector Machine, Random Forest, Naïve 
Bayes are implemented for FFHQ Dataset High Resolution 
to establish the baseline performance. Table 1 presents the 
experimental results of these models in pixel domain and 
frequency domain. Fig. 6 and Fig. 7 give the pictorial 
representation of these results. 
From the empirical results for high resolution images that 
agree with [19], it can be inferred that traditional machine 
learning models are not much viable in pixel domain; 
nevertheless, they are able to differentiate high resolution 
deepfakes in frequency domain as their spectrum is clearly 
separable. 
 
Table 1: Accuracy of Machine Learning Models in Pixel and 
Frequency Domain 
 
 
Fig. 6 Receiver Operating Characteristic-Area Under the 
Curve (ROC – AUC) Curve for Various Machine Learning 
Models in Pixel Domain 
MODEL 
ACCURACY 
(Pixel Domain) 
 ACCURACY 
(Frequency Domain) 
Random Forest 
 0.58 
 0.98 
SVM 
0.7 
0.88 
Naïve Bayes 
. 0.68 
0.96 
 Decision Tree 
0.60 
 0.97 
Logistic Regression 
0.75 
1 
Authorized licensed use limited to: OREGON STATE UNIV. Downloaded on September 18,2026 at 10:32:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- PAGE 5 ---

5 
 
 
Fig. 7 ROC - AUC Curve for Various Machine Learning 
Models in Frequency Domain 
 
A traditional CNN is implemented so as to detect the artifacts 
produced by GANs for low resolution images. The model is 
trained for 15 epochs with 20,000 training data and 2,000 
validation data and the results of evaluation on both pixel and 
frequency domain are listed in Table 2.  It can be observed 
that the model takes additional training time in frequency 
domain, owing to the domain transformation overhead but it 
has contributed to 4-5% increase in accuracy with only 
20,000 training data. Fig. 8 and Fig. 9 show the comparative 
results of the traditional CNN model’s accuracy in pixel and 
frequency domain.  
 
Table 2: Accuracy and Training Time for Traditional CNN in 
Pixel and Frequency Domain. 
 
METRIC 
PIXEL 
DOMAIN 
FREQ DOMAIN 
Test Data 
Accuracy 
85.85% 
89.70% 
ROC Score 
0.8350 
0.8860 
Training Time 
(mins) 
42 
65 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 8 Accuracy Curve for FFHQ Low-Resolution Dataset 
in Pixel Domain 
Fig. 9 Accuracy Curve for FFHQ Low-Resolution Dataset 
in Frequency Domain 
 
The proposed lightweight CNN results in 84.27% accuracy 
which is only slightly less than the traditional CNN but with 
a huge reduction in the number of model parameters.  
Let PT denote the number of trainable parameters for 
traditional CNN 
Let PL denote the number of trainable parameters for 
lightweight CNN 
Parameter reduction percentage is given by  
Parameter Reduction%  =     
()

× 100      ………….. (2) 
The parameter reduction percentage for the proposed 
lightweight model with PL = 963,521 and PT = 12,502,801, 
is found to be 92.29%. 
 
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The fast-growing popularity of GANs and deepfake 
technology with their attractive applications has raised 
concerns regarding its potential misuse. It is indispensable to 
develop tools and techniques to detect deepfakes and combat 
the related cybercrimes. A lightweight CNN is designed and 
developed to perform deepfake detection for low-resolution 
images in frequency domain. For comparison purposes, 
various machine learning models such as SVM, Naïve Bayes 
and Random Forests and traditional CNN are also 
implemented. Results show that the machine learning 
algorithms are not suitable for working in pixel domain. Also 
in frequency domain, the accuracy is not great for low-
resolution images. On the other hand, CNN works well for 
low-resolution images also but it incurs huge computation 
cost and time for training the excessive number of model 
parameters. 
The 
proposed 
lightweight 
CNN 
offers 
approximately the same accuracy as that of the traditional 
CNN but with 92% reduction in the total number of 
parameters required. 
For future work, there are two primary objectives. First 
objective is to  optimize the CNN model further to achieve 
higher accuracies for images and videos while reducing the 
number of trainable parameters. The second objective is to 
improve the model's generalizability to all existing methods 
of deepfake generation. This can be achieved by using a 
diverse dataset that encompasses a wide range of deepfake 
variations, including both known and emerging techniques. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: OREGON STATE UNIV. Downloaded on September 18,2026 at 10:32:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- PAGE 6 ---

6 
 
By exposing the model to this comprehensive dataset, it can 
learn robust features and patterns that are indicative of 
deepfake content, enabling it to effectively detect deepfakes 
regardless of the method used to generate it. Iterative model 
evaluation and fine-tuning with diverse validation datasets 
should be performed. Additionally, exploring novel 
architectural designs, regularization techniques, and dataset 
augmentation approaches can further enhance the model's 
performance and generalizability. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Manna, T., & Anitha, A. (2023). Hybridization of rough set–wrapper 
method with regularized combinational LSTM for seasonal air quality 
index prediction. Neural Computing and Applications, 1-20. 
[2] Manna, T., & Anitha, A. (2023). Precipitation prediction by integrating 
Rough Set on Fuzzy Approximation Space with Deep Learning 
techniques. 
Applied 
Soft 
Computing, 
110253. 
Doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2023.110253 
[3] Manna, T., & Anitha, A. (2023). Deep Ensemble-Based Approach 
Using Randomized Low-Rank Approximation for Sustainable 
Groundwater Level Prediction. Applied Sciences, 13(5), 3210. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/app13053210 
[4] Chadha, A., Kumar, V., Kashyap, S., & Gupta, M. (2021). Deepfake: 
an overview. In Proceedings of Second International Conference on 
Computing, Communications, and Cyber-Security: IC4S 2020 (pp. 
557-566). Springer Singapore. 
[5] Malik, A., Kuribayashi, M., Abdullahi, S. M., & Khan, A. N. (2022). 
DeepFake detection for human face images and videos: A survey. Ieee 
Access, 10, 18757-18775. 
[6] Swathi, P., & Sk, S. (2021, September). Deepfake creation and 
detection: A survey. In 2021 Third International Conference on  
Inventive Research in Computing Applications (ICIRCA) (pp. 584-
588). IEEE. 
[7] Yu, P., Xia, Z., Fei, J., & Lu, Y. (2021). A survey on deepfake video 
detection. Iet Biometrics, 10(6), 607-624. 
[8] Mirsky, Y., & Lee, W. (2021). The creation and detection of deepfakes: 
A survey. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 54(1), 1-41. 
[9] Maksutov, A. A., Morozov, V. O., Lavrenov, A. A., & Smirnov, A. S. 
(2020, January). Methods of deepfake detection based on machine 
learning. In 2020 IEEE conference of russian young researchers in 
electrical and electronic engineering (EIConRus) (pp. 408-411). IEEE. 
[10] Tariq, S., Lee, S., & Woo, S. S. (2020). A convolutional lstm based 
residual network for deepfake video detection. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:2009.07480.  
[11] Ganiyusufoglu, I., Ngô, L. M., Savov, N., Karaoglu, S., & Gevers, T. 
(2020). Spatio-temporal features for generalized detection of deepfake 
videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11844. 
[12] De Lima, O., Franklin, S., Basu, S., Karwoski, B., & George, A. (2020). 
Deepfake detection using spatiotemporal convolutional Networks 
[13] Lewis, J. K., Toubal, I. E., Chen, H., Sandesera, V., Lomnitz, M., 
Hampel-Arias, Z., ... & Palaniappan, K. (2020, October). Deepfake 
video detection based on spatial, spectral, and temporal inconsistencies 
using multimodal deep learning. In 2020 IEEE Applied Imagery 
Pattern Recognition Workshop (AIPR) (pp. 1-9). IEEE. 
[14] Durall Lopez, R., Keuper, M., Pfreundt, F. J., & Keuper, J. (2019). 
Unmasking deepfakes with simple features. 
[15] Dzanic, T., Shah, K., & Witherden, F. (2020). Fourier spectrum 
discrepancies in deep network generated images. Advances in neural 
information processing systems, 33, 3022-3032.  
[16] Frank, J., Eisenhofer, T., Schönherr, L., Fischer, A., Kolossa, D., & 
Holz, T. (2020, November). Leveraging frequency analysis for deep 
fake image recognition. In International conference on machine 
learning (pp. 3247-3258). PMLR. 
[17] Kohli, A., & Gupta, A. (2021). Detecting deepfake, faceswap and 
face2face facial forgeries using frequency cnn. Multimedia Tools and 
Applications, 80, 18461-18478. 
[18] Cao, Y., Chen, J., Huang, L., Huang, T., & Ye, F. (2023). Three-
classification face manipulation detection using attention-based feature 
decomposition. Computers & Security, 125, 103024. 
[19] Agarwal, S., Farid, H., El-Gaaly, T., & Lim, S. N. (2020, December). 
Detecting deep-fake videos from appearance and behavior. In 2020 
IEEE international workshop on information forensics and security 
(WIFS) (pp. 1-6). IEEE. 
[20] Jung, T., Kim, S., & Kim, K. (2020). Deepvision: Deepfakes detection 
using human eye blinking pattern. IEEE Access, 8, 83144-83154. 
[21] Younus, M. A., & Hasan, T. M. (2020, April). Effective and fast 
deepfake detection method based on haar wavelet transform. In 2020 
International Conference on Computer Science and Software 
Engineering (CSASE) (pp. 186-190). IEEE. 
 
 
 
 
Authorized licensed use limited to: OREGON STATE UNIV. Downloaded on September 18,2026 at 10:32:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
