

--- PAGE 1 ---

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Information Fusion
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/inffus
Full length article
Advances in DeepFake detection algorithms: Exploring fusion techniques in
single and multi-modal approach
Ashish Kumar a, Divya Singh a, Rachna Jain b, Deepak Kumar Jain c,d
,∗, Chenquan Gan e,
Xudong Zhao c
a School of Computer Science Engineering and Technology, Bennett University, Greater Noida, U.P., India
b Bhagwan Parshuram Institute of Technology, New Delhi, India
c Key Laboratory of Intelligent Control and Optimization for Industrial Equipment of Ministry of Education, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024, China
d Symbiosis Institute of Technology, Symbiosis International University, Pune 412115, India
e School of Cyber Security and Information Law, Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing 400065, China
A R T I C L E
I N F O
Keywords:
DeepFake
Artificial intelligence
Generative adversarial network
Fusion algorithms
Transformer
Detection
A B S T R A C T
In recent years, generative artificial intelligence has gained momentum and created extremely realistic
synthetic multimedia content that can spread misinformation and mislead society. Deepfake detection is a
technique consisting of frameworks, algorithms and approaches to predict manipulated contents namely, image,
audio and video. To this end, we have analyzed and explored various deepfake detection frameworks by
categorizing them as single-modal or multi-modal approaches. To provide better understanding and clarity,
single-modal approaches are further categorized as conventional and advanced techniques. Conventional tech-
niques extract complementary handcrafted features and classify them using machine-learning-based algorithms.
On the other hand, advanced techniques adopt deep learning and hybrid algorithms to detect deepfakes.
Multi-modal techniques utilize a mixture of two or more modalities for feature extraction and fuse them to
obtain the final classification scores. These techniques are also categorized either as deep learning or hybrid
techniques. The complementary features, multiple modalities, and deep learning models are fused adaptively
using score-level or feature-level fusion. The advantages, features, practical applications, and limitations under
each category are highlighted to address the challenges and determine future trends to counter deepfakes. In
addition, recommendations are also elaborated to evaluate the potential of artificial intelligence in deepfake
detection for providing a safer and more reliable digital world.
1. Introduction
With the advancement in digital media, the contamination and
tampering in multimedia content such as images, videos, and audio
have been a foremost concern nowadays [1]. The detection of alteration
is paramount at an early stage to prevent the dissemination of fake
and incorrect content to the general people with the use of social
platforms such as Facebook, Instagram, and many other [2,3]. The
fraudster’s content in the form of audio, video, and images are created
with the help of artificial intelligence (AI)-based technology such as
GANs (Generative adversarial networks) by altering the real content
with false data and are popularly known as Deepfakes [4]. DeepFakes
are technologically advanced content that superimposes fake and in-
appropriate details on the original content to generate false authentic
information.
∗Corresponding author at: Key Laboratory of Intelligent Control and Optimization for Industrial Equipment of Ministry of Education, Dalian University of
Technology, Dalian 116024, China.
E-mail addresses: ashish.gupta14d@gmail.com (A. Kumar), divya.singh@bennett.edu.in (D. Singh), rachnabtec@gmail.com (R. Jain), dkj@ieee.org
(D.K. Jain), gcq2010cqu@163.com (C. Gan), xudongzhao@dlut.edu.cn (X. Zhao).
Deepfakes are artificially synthesized contents that require a large
amount of training data for their generation [5]. Deepfakes generate
fake and inappropriate images and videos by exchanging the faces of
well-known personalities such as celebrities, and superstars. Deepfakes
can produce fake pornographic material in the form of realistic videos
and images using a person’s face without his/her permission [6].
Also, the speech and voice content of politicians and world leaders
can be modified to spread fake news and misinformation, impacting
their visibility and political careers. Deepfakes can create confusion
during military movements, misguide forensic investigations, tamper
the satellite images, and cause religious tension too [7–10]. Hence,
these contents not only deceive the individual people but are also a
threat to society and nations worldwide. The detection of deepfakes is
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2025.102993
Received 10 October 2024; Received in revised form 5 January 2025; Accepted 28 January 2025
Information Fusion 118 (2025) 102993 
Available online 5 February 2025 
1566-2535/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 


--- PAGE 2 ---

A. Kumar et al.
essential to prevent their ill effect from penetrating the human being.
Deepfakes are so realistic that they are difficult to identify with
the naked eye or ears. It requires innovative and latest technology
to differentiate the deepfakes from the original content. Recently AI-
based algorithms have provided superior results in object detection
in the presence of varying environmental conditions [11–15]. Also,
these algorithms can predict critical diseases such as cancer and tumors
at an early stage with enhanced accuracy [16–19]. These algorithms
have a wide range of applications in detecting deepfakes in multimedia
content such as audio, video, and images [20]. AI-based algorithms can
utilize either the machine-learning (ML) approach [21–23] or the Deep
learning (DL) approach [4,24–27] for detecting deepfakes. ML algo-
rithms such as random forest (RF) [23,28], decision tree (DT) [28,29],
XGBoost [28,30], support vector machine (SVM) [31,32], and many
others [8,33] are utilized for classifying the content as real or fake.
On the other hand, DL-models such as convolutional neural network
(CNN) [34,35], ResNet [36], and EfficientNet [37] are exploited for
learning robust features for deepfake detection. Also, transformers
such as vision transformer (ViT) [38,39], Swim transformer [40], and
student-teacher network [41] comprising encoder and decoder stages
are efficient in deepfake detection. These models are data-hungry,
computationally complex, and require high training time for feature
extraction.
To address the limitations of these advanced algorithms, hand-
crafted features such as color, texture, and histogram of gradient (HOG)
are extracted from image frames for detecting deepfakes [42–44]. Apart
from these features, facial points, frame level features, set-level fea-
tures, and feature distillation are also recommended for robust feature
extraction [45–48]. These features are easier to extract and process.
However, detection based on single features is not efficient enough and
prone to produce false outcomes. Hence, multi-modal deepfake detec-
tion models that can consider multiple modalities are demonstrated in
this field [41,49,50]. The multiple modalities are extracted which can
compensate for each other during the detection process. Multi-modal
information is extracted by combining multiple inputs of multimedia
data such as audio, video, and images for developing a robust deepfake
detection model. These models learn features from different modalities
in different dimensions. The features were integrated using DL models
or ensembled approaches [51–53].
1.1. Comparison with previous surveys
Deepfake detection is one of the challenging and evolving domains
of computer vision. A lot of survey papers have been published in the
recent past with a special focus on deepfakes images or videos. A few
had reviewed audio with images for deepfake detection in practical
scenarios. In 2022, Rana et al. [54] reviewed and summarized the key
algorithms in deepfake detection in four different categories namely,
DL-based, ML-based, statistical, and blockchain-based algorithms from
2018 to 2020. However, conventional techniques were not studied
and discussed. The authors comprehensively analyzed the deepfake
generation methods, and DL-based detection techniques along with a
discussion of available datasets [2]. The authors also discussed the role
of body motion reenactment and its technicality in generating deep-
fake to explore the new directions in the domain. Similarly, authors
analyzed and summarized the various DL-based deepfake creation and
detection methods [55]. The discussion majorly described the tech-
nicalities of detecting deepfakes using DL methods and the available
public datasets only. However, studies with multi-modal information
with audio as input features were limitedly included in the discussion.
Patel et al. [1] studied the ML/DL methods for deepfake creation and
the advanced encoder/decoder-based detection methods. The bene-
fits and limitations of each method were elaborated and discussed.
However, the study failed to examine the conventional and multi-
modal deepfake detection approaches. On the other hand, authors have
reviewed the potential of AI for automatic generation and detection
of deepfakes [20]. ML/DL based methods, facial expressions, and face
reenactment were elaborated for deepfakes generation along with the
associated implementation changes. A lot of deepfake data is created
and is available publicly, which not only stains one’s reputation but can
also spread misinformation. Similarly, numerous deepfake detection
algorithms have also been proposed to differentiate the fake from
the real. To summarize the representative work for deepfake creation
and detection, we have broadly categorized the algorithms into two
categories in which single modality (Image/Video/Audio) or multi-
modalities are exploited in the detection framework. Table 1 tabulates
the key focus areas and limitations of the existing surveys to highlight
the advantages and suitability of the proposed survey.
1.2. Motivation
The motivation of this review is to categorize the various deep-
fake detection algorithms based on their feature extraction techniques
and key algorithms utilized in detecting fake outcomes. Based on
the input data, deepfake algorithms are categorized either as single-
modal techniques or multi-modal techniques. Based on the extracted
features, single-modal techniques are categorized either as conven-
tional methods or advanced methods. Conventional methods extracted
handcrafted features and processed them using DL models. On the
other hand, ML-based conventional methods classified the deepfakes
using ML classifiers in the final stage. Complementary handcrafted
features were fused using either score level or feature level fusion to
generate unified robust features for deepfake classification. Further-
more, advanced methods categorized algorithms either as DL-based
or hybrid. DL-based algorithms utilized DL approaches both at the
feature extraction and processing stage. On the other hand, hybrid
algorithms extracted features using DL approaches, fused and classified
them using either ensembled ML or DL classifier. Nevertheless, multi-
modal techniques are also categorized either as DL-based algorithms
or ensembled algorithms based on the exploited feature extraction and
processing methodologies. Ensembled algorithms fused the outcome
from different DL models to generate robust features that can be fed to
the classifier for deepfake classification. We believe that this is the first
review of its kind which critically analyzed the representative work in
the deepfake detection domain from different perspectives of exploited
feature extraction and processing techniques.
1.3. Significant contributions
The key contributions of the paper are as follows:
∙Firstly, the deepfake detection framework is broadly categorized
into two classes as single-modal and multimodal detection ap-
proaches. Single-modal approaches are further categorized as
conventional and advanced techniques whereas multimodal ap-
proaches into deep learning and ensembled fusion-based tech-
niques to understand their salient features, similarities, differ-
ences, and applications.
∙Secondly, statistical analysis has been conducted to explore the
current trends in single/multi-modal deepfake detection algo-
rithms. Single-modal and multi-modal are further categorized to
review the shifting trends in traditional, ensembled, and
multimodal-based fusion methodologies.
∙Thirdly, deepfake creation techniques are reviewed following
the multimedia content namely, audio, images, and videos. The
techniques are thoroughly investigated to understand the process
of creation of realistic content in order to explore robust deepfake
detection algorithms.
∙Lastly, the recommendations, suggestions, and limitations are
thoroughly examined to highlight the need for generalizability
and explainability of advanced deepfake detection algorithms to
deal with practical challenges involved in its detection.
Information Fusion 118 (2025) 102993 
2 


--- PAGE 3 ---

A. Kumar et al.
Table 1
Comparative analysis of the proposed survey with existing survey articles considering their key strengths and limitations.
SN
Survey papers
Strength
Limitations
Comparison with the
proposed survey
1.
Albahar and Almaki [56]
Discussed various deepfake
detection methods such as face
detection, multimedia forensics,
watermarking and CNN.
Limited historical perspective and
narrow discussion on the key
benefits of deepfake detection
methods.
Statistical exploration of historical deepfake
detection methods and categorization into multiple
classes to exhibit clarity and identify potential
research directions.
2.
Seow et al. [2]
Comprehensive overview of
deepfake detection and generation
methods for facial images and
videos.
Limited focus on deepfake
detection challenges in practical
scenarios including audio in
videos.
Emphasize the robustness and reliability of
deepfake detection algorithms to address societal,
ethical, and privacy concerns.
3.
Rana et al. [54]
Systematic review of deepfake
detection videos under various
categories.
Lacked in discussion for the
deepfake detection models
generalizability, explainability
and ethical implications.
Detail the requirements of the deepfake detection
model’s generalizability and explainability to
address the real-time challenges in deepfake
detection algorithms.
4.
Malik et al. [57]
Categorized deepfake creation
methods and discussed
DNN-based deepfake detection
methods.
Discussed DNN methods for
deepfake detection in facial
images/videos only.
Elaborate deepfake detection in various multimedia
contents namely, audio, video and images with a
wide range of methodologies namely,
conventional, ML, DL and fusion-based approaches.
5.
Gupta et al. [58]
Reviewed deepfake detection
algorithms utilizing ML and
modality fusion techniques.
Analyzed deepfake video and
images for detection, with limited
discussion on deepfake creation.
Review a wider perspective of multimedia content
including audio with images/videos in detection
and creation methodologies.
6.
Mary and Edison [59]
Focused on DL-based models for
detecting deepfake videos/images
Discussed very limited DL-based
approaches exploiting CNN, RNN
and LSTM.
Provide a wider perspective of deepfakes in DL
methods including advanced approaches such as
ViT, swim transformer, etc.
7.
Patel et al. [1]
Discussed deepfake media content
generation and detection methods
based on ML, DL ensembles, and
multimodal techniques.
Limitedly discussed the
handcrafted features-based
methods for deepfake detection.
Summarize the wider perspective of single-modal
and multi-modal deepfake detection algorithms
which are further categorized for better
understanding and clarity.
8.
Passos et al. [55]
Discussed DL-based deepfake
detection methods in spatial and
temporal domains under various
categories for videos.
Restricted to DL-based detection
methodologies for deepfake
videos with brief discussion for
deepfake audio detection.
Exhaustive discussion on deepfake detection
algorithms for various media contents using
conventional, ML, DL, ensembled, multimodal,
fusion-based techniques for covering wider
applications.
9.
Abbas and Taeihagh [20]
Reviewed and categorized the
deepfakes generation and
detection techniques using ML,
and DL with a special focus on
GANs.
Discussion on multi-modal
approaches for realistic scenarios
was not presented.
Categorize single modal and multimodal deepfakes
detection. Reviewed multimodal detection
techniques as DL and ensembled fusion-based
approaches.
[ML: Machine learning, DL: Deep learning, CNN: Convolutional neural network, RNN: Recurrent neural network, LSTM: Long short-term memory, GANs: Generative adversarial
networks, ViT: Vision Transformer].
1.4. Paper organization
The rest of the paper is divided into eight sections. Section 2 details
the inclusion and exclusion strategy for selecting papers for this survey
along with their statistical analysis. Deepfakes creation and detection
methodologies are elaborated and categorized in Section 3. The details
about the conventional and advanced techniques for deepfake detection
are summarized in Sections 4 and 5, respectively. Section 6 reviews
the existing work in the multi-modal deepfake detection category.
The benefits, limitations, recommendations, and benchmarking of the
proposed review are presented in Section 7. Lastly, the concluding
remarks and future directions are provided in Section 8. For better
clarity, the details about the organization of the paper are further
illustrated in Fig. 1.
2. Search strategy and statistical distribution of deepfake algo-
rithms
In this section, we have discussed the adopted search strategy for
selecting the representative work for this literature review. We have
also analyzed the statistical distribution of the selected publications
to provide clarity of existing progress in the domain. The next section
discusses the article selection strategy utilized in this work.
2.1. PRISMA strategy for article selection
A detailed search was conducted to select the most appropriate
articles using various online platforms including IEEE, Sciencedirect,
GoogleScholar, Springer, and other sources (MDPI, ArXiv, Research-
Gate, etc.). The keywords utilized for exploring the articles were
‘‘DL-based deepfake algorithms’’, ‘‘AI-based deepfake algorithms’’, ‘‘ML-
based deepfake algorithms’’, ‘‘multi-modal deepfake detection
approaches’’, ‘‘Handcrafted features based deepfake detection algo-
rithms’’, ‘‘transformer-based deepfake detection algorithms’’, ‘‘hybrid
multi-modal deepfake detection algorithms’’, and ‘‘ensembled deepfake
detection algorithms’’. In addition, good impact factor journals and
reputed conferences from the year 2019 to till date are searched for
finding relevant and good articles written in English. Fig. 2 illustrates
the PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and
Meta-Analysis) strategy along with adopted selection criteria to select
critical studies for this work. Based on the above-mentioned criteria
an exhaustive search was performed and a total of 6658 studies were
identified. Duplicate articles were identified and removed by exploiting
the ‘‘Find Duplicates’’ feature of EndNote software by Clarivate An-
alytics. After this step, a total of 2860 studies were retained. Three
exclusion criteria were selected as (i) E1: Non-significant articles (ii)
E2: Non-relevant articles (iii) E3: Articles with insufficient data. E1
excludes articles that did not utilize the considered methodologies
and techniques utilized in this review. E2 removed those that were
not related to the domain and E3 excluded those that did not have
sufficient information in the discussion, processing data, and adopted
methodologies. In addition, the articles from non-quality journals and
conferences were also excluded from the mentioned exclusion criterion.
The criteria that were considered for deciding the conference quality
such as ranking, organizing institution, location, and previous records.
Information Fusion 118 (2025) 102993 
3 


--- PAGE 4 ---

A. Kumar et al.
Fig. 1. Description of paper structure.
Fig. 2. PRIMA search strategy for study selection.
Information Fusion 118 (2025) 102993 
4 


--- PAGE 5 ---

A. Kumar et al.
Fig. 3. Statistical distribution of deepfake detection algorithms: (a) Literature review of selected studies from year 2019 to 2024, (b) Literature review analysis of single modal
deepfake literature from year 2019 to 2024, (c) Publication analysis as per the publication type, and (d) Publication analysis as per publisher.
Survey papers were also excluded from the literature review. Consider-
ing all these conditions in all three steps, the number of articles selected
for exclusion from the analysis was 1980, 660, and 132, respectively.
Finally, a total of 88 most relevant and critical studies were selected
for discussion in this study. The next section will detail the statistical
distribution of the selected studies from different perspectives.
2.2. Statistical distribution analysis of selected articles
The study focussed on the analysis of existing work published for
deepfake detection either as single-modal deepfake algorithms or multi-
modal deepfake algorithms. It is necessary to investigate the progress
in the domain from past to present to understand future trends. This
assessment will help to determine the contribution of these algorithms
to the field of deepfake detection algorithms.
Fig. 3 depicts the statistical distribution of deepfake algorithms from
the year 2019 to 2024. Fig. 3(a) illustrates that very few single deep-
fake algorithms are published from 2019 to 2021. These algorithms
regain popularity in the year 2024 again. Publication trends evident
that multi-modal detection evolved in the past few years only. Multi-
modal algorithms are published from 2022 to 2024. The publication
trends in single modal detection algorithms are further analyzed and
depicted in Fig. 3(b). The analysis infers that there is a steep rise
in several publications under DL-based and hybrid models from the
year 2019 to 2024. Publication trends show that a comparable number
of handcrafted features based on deepfake detection are also pro-
posed due to computationally easy feature extraction and processing.
Fig. 3(c) analysis illustrates that the contribution of journal publication
(68%) is quite high in comparison to conference publication (16%)
and others (16%). Further, the contribution of journal publication is
divided as Elsevier (48%) [2,6,25,31,36,55,60,61], Springer (3%), IEEE
(8%), MDPI (9%) [52,62,63], Arxiv (11%) [29,53,64,65], and others
(5%) [33,66,67] as shown in Fig. 3(d). The highest number of journal
articles are published by Elsevier publishers and others include the
open access journals [24,68] and publications published by university
journals [26,33,69,70] and CVPR conferences [71,72].
Statistical distribution of substantial parameters such as journal
quality, number of datasets, model architectural parameters, and per-
formance metrics from selected deepfake studies are illustrated in
Fig. 4. Fig. 4(a) illustrates that most of the studies (41%) are published
by various journals and conferences with low impact factor [22,28–30,
51,53,73,74]. The journals with an impact factor from 2 to 4 contribute
to 26% [24,52,62,63,67,68,75]. Studies (7%) are from journals above
8 impact factor [39,50,76–78]. The analysis of exploited datasets by
various studies is depicted in Fig. 4(b). Most of the studies (50%)
utilized up to three datasets [10,38,43,72,75,77,79–82]. Only 2% of
the studies exploited 5 or above 5 datasets for experimental evaluation
of the model [33,52,61,71,78,83,84]. Fig. 4(c) analyses the considered
model architectural parameters in the selected studies. Very few studies
(3%) have discussed the model explainability in their analysis [6,29,75,
85–87]. Model generalizability by experimenting with its performance
on cross-datasets is evaluated by studies (19%) [21,24,33,40,51,53,65,
77,82,88–91]. Only studies (11%) [25,33,47,61,65,72,77,91–94] have
considered data augmentation techniques either for improving the
dataset quality or expanding its training size. After this, the considered
performance metrics parameters are statistically analyzed in Fig. 4(d).
Most of the studies utilized accuracy (32%) [7,25,26,40,66,68,71,72,
77,81,82,86,88,89,92,95–98] and area under the curve (23%) [3,9,
24,32,40,45,47,60–62,68,70,72,77,91,98] for comparing model per-
formance with other existing methods. Very few studies considered
sensitivity (2%) [8,26,62,86,95] and specificity (2%) [8,26,62,63,86]
as performance parameters in the analysis. Also, confusion matrix
(6%) [8,9,24,25,39,40,61–63,68,85,89,95,98] and F1-score (12%) [8,
22,24,26,36,38,49,50,62,67,68,70,74,85,86,88,97–100] are exploited
by limited studies in their experimental evaluation. The next section
will detail the deepfake creation and detection techniques.
3. Deepfakes creation and detection
In this section, deepfake generation and detection methods for vari-
ous multimedia content namely, image, video, and audio are discussed.
DL-based methods have a wide range of applications in creating high-
quality, professional, and tough-to-detect deepfakes. The details of
deepfake creation methods are as follows.
3.1. DeepFake creation algorithms
Fig. 5 illustrates the various deepfake creation methods in accor-
dance with various multimedia contents. For generating deepfakes im-
ages, DL-based networks such as GANs [101] and improved GANs [102,
Information Fusion 118 (2025) 102993 
5 


--- PAGE 6 ---

A. Kumar et al.
Fig. 4. Statistical distribution of selected studies (a) Analysis based on journal’s impact factor, (b) Analysis based on the number of datasets utilized for performance comparison,
(c) Analysis based on model architectural parameters utilized by selected studies, (d) analysis based on performance metrics utilized for performance comparison in the studies.
Fig. 5. Different techniques for creating DeepFake contents [GAN: Generative adversarial network, MFCC: Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coefficient].
103] are exploited. Lip sync, face swap, and motion reenactment
methodologies are utilized for generating deepfake videos [55,104,
105]. Deepfake audios are created using deep audio techniques, voice
conversion, and impersonation [106–108].
In [101], authors utilized super-resolution GAN for generating
photo-realistic fake images. The model adopted ResNet with skip con-
nection and perceptual loss function. This loss was generated from
high-level feature maps of the VGG network invariant to change in pixel
space. On the other hand, improved GANs namely AttGAN [102] and
StyleGAN [103] were exploited by authors for generating high-quality
and realistic photo images. AttGAN focussed on manipulating selected
single or multiple facial points while keeping the other attributes the
same. This network employed attribute classification constraint, re-
construction learning, and adversarial learning for high-quality editing
of facial attributes. Facial attributes were edited by analyzing the
relationship between the selected attribute and the latent represen-
tation of the face. On the other hand, StyleGAN studied variations
in latent factors for generating high-quality fake images. High-level
style features and stochastic effects were analyzed by StyleGAN in
comparison to conventional GAN architecture for generating realistic
fake images. Also, increasing the network depth not only improves
image quality but also prevents the severity of separability loss.
The most commonly utilized techniques for generating deepfake
videos are face swapping [105,109], lip-syncing [104,110], and face
reenactment [111,112]. In [105], authors performed face swapping by
editing latent spaces for facial and hair regions independently. Visual
attributes that were to be faked, identified, and replaced within the
latent space representation of the face and hairs. The entire image
was reconstructed automatically after performing the face swapping.
Authors introduced DeepFaceLab for face swapping and generating
high-quality deepfakes [109]. DeepFaceLab is an open-source, and
flexible code that performs face detection and then determines facial
landmarks for performing the alignment. After this segmentation was
performed which was followed by a conversion step to perform the
face swapping. The method generated cinema-quality results and high-
quality forgery video clips. Lip-synching can be used for generating
Information Fusion 118 (2025) 102993 
6 


--- PAGE 7 ---

A. Kumar et al.
dubbed voice videos, virtual assistance, and video conferencing. KR
et al. [104] generated deepfake videos using speech-to-speech and face-
to-face translations in a visual module known as LipGAN. This module
generated realistic talking faces videos by performing lip synchroniza-
tion translating talking faces into the target language automatically.
Authors performed lip sync by representing audio, modeling faces, and
generating natural talking faces [110]. Audio–visual synchronization
was analyzed using SyncNet to produce realistic and high-quality talk-
ing face videos. Another methodology for producing deepfake videos
is face reenactment in which monocular videos were rendered with
target videos for producing real-time deepfakes [111]. For performing
reenactment, facial expressions were captured for both source and
target using dense photometric consistency measure. Then, the target
video was blended with the source for synthesizing the deepfake video
stream. Zhang et al. [112] presented FReeNet for performing face reen-
actment by transferring the facial expressions from selected reference
videos to the target videos. The framework consisted of an encoder–
decoder in a unified landmark converter and then finally, the reference
was converted to a target using a geometry-aware generator. The model
learned the appearance and geometry of the target from the source
video for generating high-quality and realistic deepfake videos.
Deepfake audios are created by superimposing reference audio on
the target audio. Deep audio networks such as Char2Wav, Deep Vo-
cie3, MelNet, and many others were analyzed for synthesizing fake
audio [106]. These frameworks consisted of three modules namely,
encoder, decoder, and converter. The encoder encoded text into key
and value vectors as per timestep information. The decoder predicted
the time-aligned mel-spectrogram from the key and value vectors of the
audio samples using L1 and binary cross entropy loss. The converter
stage computed the required parameters from the decoder for generat-
ing the deepfake audio. In [107], authors discussed speech synthesis for
voice conversion and impersonation. Artificial audio can be generated
digitally by concatenating the speech samples of the reference speaker
with the target speaker. This reassembling of voice signals produced
high-quality deepfake audio. Waveform synthesis-based speech synthe-
sis systems create natural and realistic deepfake audio in comparison
to feature synthesis.
To summarize, DL-based methods can create deepfakes from various
multimedia content. These contents are generated for addressing the
individual or system problems by manipulating the data in such a way
that cannot be detected easily. With the advancement in technology,
the negative and unauthorized use of deepfake content makes its detec-
tion essential. It is challenging to classify the deepfakes from the real
ones as the generated content resembles similar to the original content.
Hence, deepfake detection is essential to protect the society from
its adverse impact. The details about the various deepfake detection
algorithms are as follows.
3.2. DeepFake detection algorithms
In this subsection, we have categorized the various deepfake de-
tection methods either as single-modal or multi-modal. Single-modal
detection methods are further classified as conventional techniques
or advanced techniques. Based on the feature extraction methods
and processing algorithms, conventional techniques are explored ei-
ther as handcrafted feature-based algorithms [42–44,72,79,87] or ML-
based algorithms [10,21,22,28,30,33,73,94]. On the other advanced
techniques are categorized as DL-based algorithms [6,34–36,66,84,
113,114] and ensembled algorithms [37,38,67,68,80,115–117]. Fur-
ther, the multimodal detection methods are analyzed either as DL-
based techniques [50,64,82,83,118] or hybrid techniques [39,49,51,
93]. Fig. 6 illustrates the categorization of deepfake detection algo-
rithms reviewed, analyzed, and detailed in this study.
The key difference between the single-modal and multi-modal deep-
fake detection techniques is the number of input modalities exploited
in the detection model [39]. Single-modal deepfake detection algo-
rithms consider individual modalities namely, image, audio and video
for feature extraction to detect fake or manipulated content. On the
other hand, multi-modal deepfake detection algorithms exploited the
synchronization between audio and video, lip movement, facial move-
ments, mouth shape dynamics, and spoken phenomics to detect false
contents altogether. However, the deepfake creation techniques address
this change efficiently by generating realistic videos in which it is
hard to detect the difference between real and fake. Single modalities
are not efficient enough to detect these inconsistencies whereas multi
modalities deepfake detection models can analyze the variations in
speech and facial characteristics effectively.
In comparison to multi-modal deepfake detection techniques, single-
modal deepfake detection algorithms have a wide range of applications.
The reason could be the availability of public datasets, less computa-
tional complexity, and generalizable models. However single modality-
based models are easily deceivable. Multimodal deepfake detection
algorithms can address the real-time challenges of deepfake detection
efficiently, and are more accurate and robust. However, limited avail-
ability and low-quality content in audio–visual multimodal deepfake
datasets restrict their practical applicability [83]. Also, the existing
multimodal deepfake datasets labeled the entire audio–visual pairs as
fake which makes it tedious to detect the real part from it [119].
These algorithms can perform emotional analysis, speech recognition,
and facial analysis to compute the variations that are often present in
deepfakes. The similarity between the perceived emotions between the
two modalities i.e. audio and video in a video can be analyzed using
multi-modal learning to detect deepfakes [120].
Further to highlight the strengths and weaknesses of deepfake detec-
tion algorithms under each category, the salient features are elaborated
in Table 2. The various deepfake detection algorithms are compared
based on the exploited methodology, feature extraction, data require-
ments, data preprocessing, and many other substantial parameters.
The similarities and differences of each category of deepfake detec-
tion algorithms are tabulated in Table 3. In this, the algorithms are
compared based on the utilized AI models, fusion strategy, data classi-
fication stage, model explainability, cross-datasets evaluation for model
generalizability, and many others.
4. Single modal based conventional techniques for deepfake de-
tection
Fig. 7 illustrates the generalized framework of conventional tech-
niques for deepfake detection. The preprocessing stage extracted frames
from video using frame sequencing, and audio data was converted to an
image by generating a spectrogram for extracting robust features for the
processing stage. Based on the extracted features and processing stage
conventional techniques are categorized as handcrafted features-based
algorithms and ML-based algorithms. The details about the handcrafted
features-based deepfake algorithms are discussed in the next section.
4.1. Handcrafted features-based fusion algorithms
Table 4 tabulates the salient features of representative work se-
lected under the category of handcrafted feature-based approach. These
approaches performed manual feature extraction to maintain the com-
putational complexity of the model. The extracted features can be color,
texture, HOG, computer vision (CV), etc.
Handcrafted features are lightweight, less complex, and easier to ex-
tract. In this direction, authors extracted texture features to analyze the
irregularities in the different regions of the deepfakes [43]. The texture
feature was extracted using the LBP (local binary pattern) approach.
The feature was extracted for the facial region only which was detected
using the MTCNN classifier. Gamma correction and inter-frame face
similarity were also used for detecting facial regions in low-contract
images. Similarly, Yang et al. [121] studied the difference between the
Information Fusion 118 (2025) 102993 
7 


--- PAGE 8 ---

A. Kumar et al.
Fig. 6. Categorization of various deepfake detection algorithms.
Table 2
Salient features of various deepfake detection algorithms.
SNo.
Attributes
SMD algorithms
MMD algorithms
1
Methodology
CT
AT
DLT
HT
2
Feature extraction
HC or DF
HL
DF
DF or HIE
3
Data requirements
Less
High
High
High
4
Data preprocessing
✓
×
×
×
5
Performance
Moderate
High
High
High
6
Advantages
Require less training data
Automatic feature extraction
Identified visual inconsistencies
Suitable for real-world applications
7
Limitations
Not suitable for real-time
High training data
High training data
Slow processing
8
Computational complexity
Less
High
Moderate
High
SMD: Single modal detection, MMD: Multi modal detection, CT: Conventional technique, AT: Advanced technique, DLT: DL technique, HT: Hybrid technique, HC: Handcrafted, DF:
Deep features, HL: High-level, HIE: Hierarchical.
Table 3
Similarities/Differences between various deepfake detection techniques.
SNo.
Attributes
CT
AT
DLT
HT
1
AI-models
ML
DL and Transformer
DL
DL and Transformer
2
Fusion strategy
✓
✓
×
✓
3
Data classification
ML-based
DL-based
DL-based
ML or DL based
4
Multiple datasets
✓
✓
✓
✓
5
Statistical measures
✓
✓
✓
✓
6
Explainability
×
✓
✓
✓
7
Cross-dataset evaluation
✓
✓
✓
×
8
Interoperability
×
✓
×
✓
DL: Deep learning, ML: Machine learning, CT: Conventional technique, AT: Advanced technique, DLT: Deep Learning technique, HT: Hybrid
technique.
texture of real and fake images in an image saliency map. Superpixel
segmentation was utilized for computing the texture information. The
Euclidean distance was computed between the corresponding regions
using three different approaches RGB, CIELab, and LBP. The image was
divided into multiple superpixels for creating the saliency. On the other
hand, authors ensembled texture and artifact information for detecting
the inconsistencies between the real and deepfakes [42]. Artifact refers
to the random and synthesized noise disturbances present in the real
and deepfakes. The cosine distance measured the similarity distance
between the texture inconsistencies between real and fake. Score level
fusion fused the texture inconsistencies score and artifacts to obtain the
combined results for deepfake detection. Authors fused fisherface with
LBP histogram features on the dimensionality reduced facial images
for predicting deepfakes [26]. The noise in the images was removed
using the Kalman filter and images were normalized for image contrast
enhancement.
Analysis of illumination variations is highly effective for detecting
deepfakes. For this, Zhu et al. [84] extracted illumination inconsistency
at the frame level along with multi-level feature enhancement for
enhancing feature-level illumination. Features in the low-frequency
domain were obtained by DCT (Discrete cosine transform) for capturing
illumination changes in the frequency domain. Feature level fusion
fused to obtain the final score for deepfake detection. In [79], the au-
thor computed DCT values by dividing the detected face into a uniform
block of 8 × 8. Once the face was localized then partly sign-altered
value and partly sign-altered mean value was computed. Finally, deep-
fakes were detected using mixed modulation techniques. However, the
authors extracted spatial and frequency domain features and fused
them within a knowledge distillation for classifying the deepfakes and
real [78]. The features were extracted by applying DCT on raw as
well as compressed images. The extracted features were fused in three
phases namely, split, fuse, and select using SKAttention. Xu et al. [47]
proposed joint distillation along with the knowledge transfer stage for
deepfake detection. The feature importance was determined by explor-
ing the relationship between gradient information and feature maps.
The negative transfer in feature importance was adjusted using the
exponential decay rule. Authors employed knowledge distillation along
with representation learning for classifying deepfakes [72]. Features
were represented using transfer learning to reduce the computational
complexity of the base model. Adaptation learning was utilized for
Information Fusion 118 (2025) 102993 
8 


--- PAGE 9 ---

A. Kumar et al.
Fig. 7. Generalized architecture of conventional techniques for deepfake detection.
controlling the three loss functions namely, KD loss, cross-entropy
loss, and feature-based square loss used for calculating the difference
between real and fake.
To determine the integrity of videos, authors proposed to extract the
CV features from each video frame [81]. The rate of change between
frames was computed for each feature to distinguish the deepfakes
from the real. Similarly, Saravana et al. [46] also extracted multi-
ple CV features but using fuzzy clustering algorithms. Images were
pre-processed using the Gabor filter-based Gaussian rule to improve
quality by eliminating noises. Deep belief network-based classifier for
classifying the deepfakes from real by reducing the detection loss
and improving the energy function. However, the authors extracted
semantic and contextual information to detect deepfakes generated by
the face-swapping technique [77]. Semantic information included the
boundaries of facial regions whereas contextual features captured the
face contexts such as hair, ear, etc.
Biological and physiological features are considered to be the best
visual descriptors for detecting deepfakes. In this direction, Elhassan
et al. [45] utilized teeth and mouth movement for detecting the deep-
fake videos. 68 landmarks on facial images with open mouth showing
teeth acted as distinguished and lightweight features were identified
for detecting the fake teeth. Mouth regions were cropped from facial
images using mouth aspect ratio and mouth openness with 12 points for
both upper and lower lips. Features were processed using multiple DL
algorithms and deep fakes were classified using clustering algorithms.
On the other hand, authors analyzed the change in skin color as a
physiological feature in deepfake images using remote photoplethys-
mography (rPPG) through camera [85]. rPPG were computed for the
extracted region using the Chrom method which averages the RGB
values. These features were converted to the frequency domain using
the Fast Fourier transform and frequency composition was identified
using power spectral density. This method effectively classified the
deepfakes from the real.
Spoofed audio and speech need to be determined to prevent de-
ception and voice phishing. In order to determine spoofed audio,
authors fused raw waveform signals with spectrograms as distinguished
features [87]. The feature distribution of spoofed speech for explaining
its likelihood was analyzed using the SHAP method of model explain-
ability. Feature correlation in a high-frequency range was used for the
classification of real and deepfake audio. On the other hand, Balles-
teros et al. [92] extracted entropy-based handcrafted features from the
audio recordings. These features were transformed into histograms for
classifying deepfake audios from the real.
To summarize, handcrafted features were extracted and processed
for identifying deepfakes audio, video, and images. The differences
and the variations between the real and the spoofed information were
identified and compared for classification. Data was pre-processed not
only to identify the region of interest but also to eliminate the impact of
noise and improve contrast and resolution. The extracted information
was processed and classified using either DL models or ML models.
Handcrafted features based on conventional techniques are fast and
suitable for real-time but with limited applicability.
4.2. Machine learning-based algorithms
In this subsection, ML-based deepfake detection techniques are de-
tailed. The techniques are categorized as ML-based deepfake detection
in which features are extracted using either a handcrafted approach or
DL-based approaches but classified using various ML-based techniques.
Table 5 tabulates the salient features of ML-based approaches for
deepfake detection. ML-based approaches for deepfake detection can
be trained easily and faster in providing the results. In this direction,
Wang et al. [31] trained an RF classifier for detecting the deepfakes.
Deepfakes have fewer facial point features in comparison to real ones
which were efficiently classified with ML based classifier from a fused
facial region descriptor. The facial region descriptor was generated by
integrating various handcrafted features such as SIFT (Scale-invariant
feature transform), SURF, FAST (Features from accelerated segment
test) & BRIEF (Binary robust independent elementary features), ORB
(Rotated BRIEF) and A-KAZE. RF also selected important features to im-
prove the efficiency of the detection algorithm. On the other hand, the
SVM classifier was utilized for detecting variations in facial regions con-
sidering inconsistencies of texture features [10] and head poses [32].
In [10], authors trained and classified the deepfake detection model
using SVM. Texture feature maps were generated for both real and fake
videos at three levels namely, pixel, block, and region. The statistical
disparities were analyzed by extracting the color information from the
R, G, B, V, and Y channels. However, the authors estimated the errors
in 3D head poses of facial images for detecting deepfakes [32]. The
facial landmark points were formulated as an optimization problem and
solved using the Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm. SVM classifier was
trained by estimating the difference between full facial landmarks and
central facial region landmarks for classifying deepfakes from real.
Multiple ML algorithms were trained to obtain better results for
deepfake detection. In this direction, Hamza et al. [28] exploited
RF, MLP (Multi-layer perceptron), DT, EXC (Extra tree classifier),
LR (Logistic regression), Gaussian NB (Naïve Bayes), AdaBoost, GB
(Gradient boosting), XGBoost, LDA (linear discriminant analysis, and
QDA (Quadratic discriminant analysis). Overall, SVM outperformed
the other ML algorithms and achieved the highest accuracy. Similarly,
authors adopted six ML algorithms such as SVM, MLP, DT, LR, NB,
and XGBoost for classifying the deepfake audio from real [30]. The
processing for these classifiers by selecting important features for
training using PCA (Principal component analysis). This model also
Information Fusion 118 (2025) 102993 
9 


--- PAGE 10 ---

A. Kumar et al.
Table 4
Single modal conventional fusion based deepfake detection techniques with handcrafted features.
SN
Citation
Features
Modality
Fusion
strategy
Dataset
Performance
metrics
Summary
1.
Hsu et al. [79]
DCT
Image
Modulation
CVG-UGR, Large
Logo DB, and
Large Logo DB
PSNR, SSIM,
BER, Loss and
NCC
∙Identified relative positions of
modification in real images using
temper detection mean value.
∙Optimized network parameters
using gray wolf optimizer.
∙Adopted denoising mechanism
for extracting watermark
information.
2.
Zhu et al. [84]
Frame-level
illumination
variations
Image
Attentional
based feature
fusion
FaceForensics++,
Celeb-DF and
DFDC
ACC and AUC
∙Analyzed illumination
inconsistencies in inter-frame for
deepfake detection.
∙Multi-level feature enhancement
for enhancing inconsistencies at
feature-level.
∙Results of illumination
decomposition not good in
regions where hair were present.
3.
Leporoni et al.
[44]
RGB and Depth
Image
Attentional
based feature
fusion
FaceForensics++
ACC, AUC, and
Heatmaps
∙Extracted depth information
from whole image frame using
pre-trained model.
∙Two parallel networks for depth
features and one network for RGB
extraction.
∙Both features processed
individually and stacked together
using MobileNet v2.
4.
Wang et al. [78]
Frequency
domain and
spatial-domain
features
Image
Attentional
based fusion
FaceForensics++,
and Celeb-DF
ACC and AUC
∙Fused the spatial and frequency
domain features to improve
detection ACC.
∙Knowledge distillation at the
classification step transferring
knowledge for classifying
deepfakes.
∙Achieved highest ACC (98.98%)
on Celeb-DF DB.
5.
Yu et al. [87]
Raw waveform
signals and
spectrograms in
vector stitching
Audio
Feature fusion
ASVspoof 2019
Loss rate and
SHAP value
distribution
∙Fused extracted features using
lighter feature level fusion
techniques.
∙Utilized explainability to
determine feature contribution
and importance.
∙Analyzed feature correlation in
high frequency range of the
waveform.
6.
Gao et al. [42]
Texture and
artifact
Video
Score level
fusion
FaceForensics++,
Celeb-DF,
WildDF and
DFDC
ACC, AUC, and
CM
∙Texture artifacts detector to
detect the inconsistencies between
the real and fake.
∙Multiple deformable
convolutional stacks to separate
between target and source using
the soft trainable mask.
∙Captured artifacts data using
the shallow network.
7.
Kim et al. [72]
TL-based feature
representation
Image
Representation
learning and KD
FaceForensics++
ACC, F1-score
∙Extracted features presented in
both source and target dataset.
∙Experimented on a low-quality
dataset to prove the model
efficiency.
∙Performance evaluated on a
single small dataset and achieved
86.97% (ACC).
8.
Kingra et al.
[43]
Texture
Image
Combining LBP
with LBPNet
Celeb-DF, DFDC,
and
DeeperForensic
ACC, AUC, PR,
and RE
∙Utilized local binary pattern for
extracting texture features from
facial regions.
∙Fully connected deep CNN as
classification network for
deepfake.
∙DB augmentation for generating
real-time images for deepfake
classification.
(continued on next page)
Information Fusion 118 (2025) 102993 
10 


--- PAGE 11 ---

A. Kumar et al.
Table 4 (continued).
9.
Ni et al. [85]
Physiological
Video
FFT
DeepFakeTIMIT
ACC, F1-score,
CM and AUC
∙Analyzed change in skin color
using remote
photoplethysmography signals.
∙Extracted skin color information
using chrom method.
∙Generated matrix visualization
heatmap using time–frequency
domain analysis of signals.
10.
Lee and Kim
[81]
CV features:
mse, psnr, ssim,
rgb, hsv,
histogram,
luminance,
variance,
edge_density, dot
Video
Grouped the rate
of change
between frames
FaceForensics++
and DFDC
ACC
∙Detected the rate of change in
the subsequent frame
incorporated by GANs for
generating deepfakes.
∙Utilized multiple CV features for
detection.
∙Achieved avg. 96.53% (ACC) on
multiple datasets.
11.
Nirkin et al.
[77]
Context and
semantic
Image
Simple score
concatenation
FaceForensics++,
Celeb-DF-v2,
DFDC and SG
DB
ACC, AUC, FPR
∙Compared changed context
information in deepfake with real
for detection.
∙Trained face discrepancy
network to compare the identity
information in face and its
context.
∙Performed analysis on unseen
data to determine model ACC.
12.
Yang et al. [121]
Texture
Image
Guided filter
combining linear
relationship
FaceForensics++
ACC
∙Detected deepfake by comparing
the texture difference between
the real and fake image.
∙Guided filter to enhance texture
information in the image saliency
during pre-processing.
∙Achieved detection ACC (95%)
on benchmark dataset.
13.
Ballesteros et al.
[92]
Statistics,
entropy and
histogram
features
Audio
CNN
LJ Speech DB,
and SG
ACC, RE, PR and
loss
∙Transformed audio inputs into
images such as spectrograms for
classification.
∙CNN with data augmentation
and dropout for fake audio
classification.
14.
Saravana et al.
[46]
CV features such
as mse, PSNR,
SSIM, rgb, hsv,
histogram,
luminance,
variance,
edge_density,
DCT
Video
Contraceptive
loss based
pairwise learning
FaceForensics++
and DFDC
ACC, PR, RE,
AUC, error and
loss
∙Extracted CV features using
fuzzy C-means clustering.
∙Utilized stacked RBM layer in
hidden layer along with sigmoid
activation.
∙Adopted contrastive loss for
handling outputs during pairwise
learning.
∙Achieved global ACC (98.5%)
across multiple DBs.
15.
Suganthi et al.
[26]
FF-LBPH
Image
FF-LBPH-DBN
FFHQ,
100K-Faces,
DFFD, and
CASIA-WebFace
ACC, SPE, SEN,
AUC, error rate
and
computational
time
∙Utilized DBN-RBM classifier for
deepfake classification.
∙Dimensionality reduction
algorithms for feature extraction.
∙Kalman filter for eliminating
noise from the images.
16.
Xu et al. [47]
Gradient guided
distillation
feature map
Video
Xception_6S
FaceForensics++
and Celeb-DF
AUC, ACC,
FLOPS, and
Param
∙Applied joint distillation loss
function for transferring
information from shallow to deep
layers.
∙Dimension alignment for
relating teacher network with the
student network.
∙Analyzed model generalizability
in cross-domain scenarios.
(continued on next page)
claimed that the SVM is superior and accurate in detecting real and
fake video in a short time. Authors utilized multiple ML classifiers
such as SVM, RF, extremely randomized tree, DT, MLP, Stochastic GB,
and KNN for training the model for identifying deepfake videos [23].
Multiple handcrafted features were extracted and fused to form a
single deepfake feature vector before feeding to the ML classifier.
However, no feature-selected approach was adopted to improve the
model processing.
In [71], authors extracted local features using expectation max-
imization algorithms. This algorithm generated a feature vector by
computing probability and estimating weights for each element. This
feature vector was integrated with RGB channels for obtaining the
final vector for detecting deepfakes generated by multiple GANs net-
works. The deepfakes were classified using different ML algorithms
Information Fusion 118 (2025) 102993 
11 


--- PAGE 12 ---

A. Kumar et al.
Table 4 (continued).
17.
Elhassan et al.
[45]
Teeth and mouth
features
Video
CNN,
DenseNet121,
DenseNet169,
EfficientNetB0,
EfficientNetB7,
InceptionV3,
MobileNet,
MobileNetV2,
ResNet50,
vgg16, vgg19
and Xception
Vid-TIMIT,
Celeb-DF, and
UADFV
ACC, and AUC
∙Model highly dependent on
facial images with mouth open
showing teeth.
∙Multiple DL models for
determining the model suitability
for processing features.
∙Utilized stochastic gradient for
model optimization and faster
convergence.
∙Among all the DL models, CNN
achieved the highest ACC and
AUC.
[DB: Dataset, ML: Machine learning, SG: Self-generated, KD: Knowledge distillation, FF: Fisher face, LBPH: Linear binary pattern histogram, ACC: Accuracy, PR: Precision, RE:
Recall, AUC: Area under the curve, SPE: Specificity, SEN: Sensitivity, CV: Computer vision, GAN: Generative adversarial networks, mse: mean squared error, PSNR: peak signal to
noise ratio, SSIM: structural similarity index measure, hsv: hue; saturation; value, DCT: Discrete cosine transform, FFT: Fast Fourier transform, BER: Bit error rate, NCC: normalized
cross-correlation, DFDC: Deepfake detection challenge, DBN: Deep belief network, RBM: Restricted Boltzmann machine].
such as SVM, LDA, and KNN. Authors utilized three ML algorithms
namely, SVM, RF, and DT along with five DL algorithms for detecting
tempering in medical imaging [94]. Five DL models were used for
feature extraction from the augmented datasets. Classifiers were trained
to detect the tempered medical images using different ML classifiers.
Among all the ML classifiers, SVM achieves the highest training and test
accuracy. Farid et al. [33] proposed to utilize ML-based classifiers for
detecting deepfakes in audio, video, and images. The synthetic content
generated through face swap, lip sync, and other methodologies were
easily classified from real using ML classifiers such as SVM and RF.
Further, authors utilized ML algorithms for detecting the deepfake
images generated by face swapping algorithms [73]. The indicators
such as skin details, color mismatch, temporal flickering, head posi-
tions, resolution, eye blinking rate, face warping artifacts, and lipsync
were considered to detect deepfakes. For achieving better performance,
noise was introduced using Gaussian blur, exponential blur, Rayleigh
blur, and random specific blur. The video frames were analyzed, and
the video was classified as deepfake if 1% of the frames were modified.
Mitra et al. [22] exploited multiple CNNs for feature extraction and
ML-classifiers for the identification of deepfake videos. The model
computational efficiency was improved by extracting the key frames
from each video to determine its manipulated contents. Similarly,
authors utilized multiple CNNs for feature extraction and a classifier
for detecting manipulated videos [21]. The frames were extracted
from the videos, and faces were detected, cropped, and resized before
processing. The features were extracted and processed through a global
average pooling2D with fully connected followed by softmax as the
classifier network. On the other hand, similarity scores were fed to
the classifier network for identifying the video content as fake or
authentic [8]. LR was used for converting the high similarity score into
likelihood ratio for better calibration of analysis obtaining misleading
evidence. The method was able to identify fake videos generated by
face swap techniques for a portrayed person. However, the limited
dataset availability for multiple reference videos of the same person
restricts the cross-validation of the method.
To summarize, ML-based deepfake detection techniques are
lightweight, interpretable, and understandable with less processing
time. ML-based classifiers are easily trainable for detecting the deepfake
contents generated using various creation techniques. Features were ex-
tracted using conventional techniques or DL-models for developing the
robust model. The feature selection and keyframe selection approaches
were adopted to improve the fused feature vector before feeding it to
the ML-classifier.
5. Single modal-based advanced techniques for deepfake detec-
tion
In this section, advanced techniques for deepfake detection are
elaborated using a single modality namely, image, audio, and videos.
Advanced techniques utilized DL techniques for feature extraction,
feature processing, and classification. Based on this approach, advanced
techniques are categorized either as DL-based algorithms or hybrid
algorithms. DL-based algorithms utilize DL approaches for feature ex-
traction and feature classification whereas hybrid algorithms utilize
multiple DL-approaches for feature extraction, processing, and classi-
fication. Multiple ML-algorithms are exploited for classification with
DL-models for classification in hybrid algorithms. Fig. 8 illustrates the
various components of deepfake detection using advanced techniques.
5.1. Deep learning-based algorithms
In this section, various DL-based algorithms for deepfake detec-
tion are discussed. Table 6 tabulates the representative work cate-
gorized under this category of deepfake detection algorithms. These
algorithms are suitable for detecting deepfakes in highly compressed
low-quality videos. In this direction, Zhu et al. [27] extracted spatial-
frequency features using spatio-temporal inconsistency in highly com-
pressed deepfake video. The temporal correlation information and
structural knowledge were processed using the temporal-contrastive
distillation model based on a two-stage student-teacher (ST) network.
Similarly, authors utilized a two-branch convolutional auto encoder
for performing deepfake reconstruction and classification [61] video.
The temporal correlation information and structural knowledge were
processed using the temporal-contrastive distillation model based on
a two-stage student-teacher (ST) network. Similarly, authors utilized
a two-branch convolutional auto encoder for performing deepfake re-
construction and classification [61]. Local and global information was
combined and mapped the extracted features into latent space for
improving the generalization ability. XceptionNet was exploited in the
shared encoder branch and ReLu after each fully connected layer in
the classifier network. Authors proposed convolutional ViT for deepfake
video detection [65]. Convolutional Vit consisted of a CNN network for
extracting learnable local and global features and ViT for processing
these features. ViT utilized eight attentional mechanisms for categoriz-
ing the video either as real or deepfake. A softmax layer was applied
to restrict the final weights between 0 to 1 for deepfake detection.
In [97], authors proposed a holistic DFD transformer for detecting
deepfakes videos. Features namely, spatial, temporal, and spatiotempo-
ral were extracted using 2D and 3D convolutional layers in the trans-
former, respectively. Self-attention-based transformer encoders pro-
cessed the extracted features and fused the feature vectors followed by
softmax layers. A fully connected linear classifier was used for classi-
fication using dropout and L2 regularization. Pu et al. [36] utilized a
dual-level network for fusing the frame-level and video-level features.
Spatial features were extracted using ResNet-50, pre-trained CNN. Tem-
poral learning was performed using GRU nodes followed by average
polling. After this, the frame level and video level classifier consisting of
a fully connected layer classified the videos as deepfakes by minimizing
the loss function. Similarly, authors extracted spatio-temporal features
using 3D CNN by considering short sixteen consecutive frames from a
Information Fusion 118 (2025) 102993 
12 


--- PAGE 13 ---

A. Kumar et al.
Table 5
Single modal conventional deepfake detection techniques with machine learning-based algorithms.
SN
Citation
Features
Modality
Technique
Dataset
Performance
metrics
Summary
1.
Wang et al. [31]
Feature points
from subdivided
facial regions
Image
RF
DeepfakeTIMIT,
UADFV,
FF++_DeepFake
DFD, DFDC, and
Celeb-DF_V2
AUC and
computational
time
∙Extracted multiple features from
various facial points.
∙Calculated feature Gini
importance for identifying crucial
features for detection.
∙Training model RF quite faster
in comparison to other
techniques.
2.
Yang et al. [32]
Head poses
Image
SVM classifier
UADFV DB
AUC
∙Detected face and 2D facial
landmarks in the image.
∙Detected 68 facial landmarks
using face detector DLib software
package.
∙Difference between the head
projections of fake and real
determined by alignment error.
3.
Xia et al. [10]
Color and
texture
Video
SVM classifier
FaceForensics++
and Celeb-DF
AUC, ACC and
computational
time
∙Extracted RGB color feature and
texture feature from
co-occurrence matrix.
∙Designed three feature maps for
capturing effective features.
∙Trained SVM classifier for
binary classification of deepfake
videos.
4.
Farid [33]
Low level
(pixel-based) and
high level
(semantic
features)
Image, audio,
video
LR, SVM
ASVSpoof,
FaceForensics++,
Celeb-DF-v2,
DFDC and
deepfake DB
–
∙Learning based detection
algorithms classified real from
fake content using ML classifiers.
∙Extracted artifacts-based
low-level and high-level features
fed into classifiers for detecting
deepfakes.
5.
Hamza et al.
[28]
MFCC
Audio
SVM, MLP, DT,
ETC, LR, GNB,
AB, GB,
XGBoost, LDA,
and QDA
for-rece,
for-2-sec,
for-norm and
for-original
ACC
∙Utilized ensembled feature
approach, MFCC as the main
feature.
∙Compared different ML
algorithms for detecting deepfake
from the real.
∙SVM outperformed other ML
algorithms.
6.
Iqbal et al. [30]
MFCC,
spectral_rolloff,
spectral_centroid,
spectral_contrast,
spec-
tral_bandwidth
and
zero_crossing_rate
features
Audio
SVM, MLP, DT,
LR, GNB, and
XGBoost
Fake or real DB
ACC
∙Utilized data framing for
converting audio signals to
machine-readable form.
∙Sliding window technique for
extracting 270 features, and PCA
technique to determine 65
important features.
∙XGBoost achieved average
highest ACC (93%) compared to
other ML models.
7.
Maksutov et al.
[73]
–
Image
ML algorithms
Celeb-DF
AUC
∙Analyzed deepfake quality to
classify fake and real.
∙Analyzed color mismatch
between fake and real for
classification.
∙Applied affine transformation on
randomly cropped and resized
images.
8.
Rana et al. [23]
HOG, Haralic,
Hu Moments,
and CH
Video
SVM, RF, MLP,
KNN, extremely
randomized
trees, DT, and
Stochastic GB
FaceForensics++,
Celeb-DF, VDFD
and DFDC
ACC, AUC, PR,
RE, F1-score,
𝑝-value, F-test
and Q-test
∙Adopted feature selection
techniques to reduce the model
complexity.
∙Extracted multiple features and
fused them into a single vector.
∙Utilized various ML classifiers
for detecting deepfakes.
9.
Mitra et al. [22]
Deep features
Video
ML classifier
FaceForensics++
and DFDC
ACC, PR, RE,
and F1-score
∙Compressed videos to reduce
the model complexity.
∙Multiple DL models for
extraction of robust features.
∙Simple classifier for classifying
videos either as fake or real.
(continued on next page)
Information Fusion 118 (2025) 102993 
13 


--- PAGE 14 ---

A. Kumar et al.
Table 5 (continued).
10.
Solaiyappan and
Wen [94]
Deep features
Image
SVM, RF, and
DT
CT DB,
LIDC-IDRI and
CT-GAN DB
ACC, AUC, PR,
RE and Loss
∙Multiple DL models for feature
extraction and multiple ML
classifiers for classifying fake and
real medical images.
∙Utilized tempered and
untampered DB to predict real
and artificially modified medical
images.
∙SVM achieved highest
classification ACC in comparison
to other models.
11.
Mitra et al. [21]
Deep features
Video
ML classifier
FaceForensics++
ACC
∙Exploited TL for reducing time
and computational complexity.
∙Replaced last layer for
connected end-to-end fine-tuning.
∙Xception net-based features
along with classifier achieved
highest ACC (96%).
12.
Reis and Ribeiro
[8]
Deep CNN based
feature
extraction
Video
Threshold based
classifier
Celeb-DF (v2)
and world leader
DB
ACC, AUC, PR,
RE and F1-score
∙Extracted similarity scores from
real and fake videos.
∙Threshold-based classification
for classifying videos as fake or
real.
∙Applied LR to convert scores to
likelihood for forensic analysis.
13.
Guarnera et al.
[71]
RGB and Local
features using
EM
Image
SVM, LDA and
KNN
CELEBA DB and
five different
GANs generated
DB
ACC
∙Explored different kernel
dimensions for detecting
deepfakes.
∙Used multiple GANs for
generating deepfake images.
∙Adhoc validation using different
ML classifiers.
DB: Dataset, SVM: Support vector machine, ML: Machine learning, MFCC: Mel-frequency cepstral coefficients, TL: Transfer learning, LR: Logistic regression, MLP: Multi-layer
perceptron, DT: Decision tree, ETC: Extra tree classifier, GNB: Gaussian Naive Bayes, KNN: k-Nearest neighbor, PCA: Principle component analysis, AB: Ada Boost, GB: Gradient
boosting, LDA: Linear discriminant analysis, HOG: Histogram of gradient, CH: Color histogram, QDA: Quadratic discriminant analysis, DFDC: Deepfake detection challenge, ASVSpoof:
Automatic Speaker Verification Spoofing and Countermeasures challenge, AUC: Area under the curve.
Fig. 8. Generalized architecture for deepfake detection using advanced techniques.
video [35]. The extracted features were processed using CNN consisting
of a convolutional layer, dropout, and fully connected layer followed
by a softmax layer. The classifier classified the videos either as real or
fake.
The deepfakes videos and images generated using generative tech-
niques are tedious to detect. To detect such manipulations, authors
designed a multi-scale module consisting of CNN and ViT transformer
for determining manipulations in facial regions [114]. Face details
were captured using dilation convolution and depthwise separable
convolution. ViT captured the global feature information using multi-
head self-attention and utilized MLP for image classification as fake
or real. Similarly, authors utilized MLP for learning the classification
parameters for deepfake and real [113]. CNN extracted the facial
landmarks consisting of temporal and shape features. The outcomes
from the CNN and MLP concatenated using a fully connected layer
with ReLU activation and a dense layer with a sigmoid activation
function. In [88], authors utilized pre-trained model weights using
a weight transfer technique for multi-class classification in the ViT
framework. ViT comprised of attention mechanism, global content, and
classification module for determining manipulations and alteration in
low-quality datasets. On the other hand, Amin et al. [66] exploited a
multi-transformer comprised of a SpectraVisionFusion transformer. The
framework extracted features in the spatial and frequency domain from
two different networks in the encoder. Weighted feature fusion mech-
anisms were embedded to obtain fused feature vectors for performing
the classification from the transformer decoder and classification head
layer.
Information Fusion 118 (2025) 102993 
14 


--- PAGE 15 ---

A. Kumar et al.
Table 6
Single modal advanced deepfake detection techniques with deep learning-based algorithms.
SN
Citation
Features
Modality
Technique
Dataset
Performance
metrics
Summary
1.
Khalid et al.
[34]
Deep features
from
convolutional
layers
Video
Graph NN
FaceForensics++,
Celeb-DF, DFDC
and World
leaders DB
ACC and AUC
∙Determined features with
smaller spatial sizes in the image
frames.
∙Constructed graphs by
extracting edge information using
K nearest neighbor.
∙Cross-DB analysis to prove the
generalizability of the method.
2.
Nguyen et al.
[35]
3D convolution
kernels for
extracting
spatio-temporal
features
Video
3D CNN
FaceForensics++
and VidTIMIT
ACC
∙Extracted spatial and temporal
features from consecutive video
frames.
∙Utilized complex network
models and different kernel sizes
for network evaluation.
∙Achieved highest ACC (99.7%)
on VidTIMIT DB.
3.
Raza et al. [97]
Spatial, temporal
and
spatio-temporal
features using
transformer
Video
Convolutional
transformer
FaceForensics++,
Celeb-DF, and
DFDC
ACC, AUC and
F1-score
∙Combined different views of a
video for analyzing deepfakes.
∙Extracted suspected regions by
extracting different features.
∙Lightweight and fast model in
comparison to existing
state-of-the-art with fewer
hyperparameters.
4.
Lin et al. [114]
Dilation
convolution and
depthwise
separable
convolution
Image
ViT
Celeb-DF, DFDC,
FaceForensics++,
and
WildDeepfake
ACC and AUC
∙Extracted spatial domain
information from facial regions.
∙Integrated dual-subnet and
multi-scale information for
effective deepfake detection.
∙Captured facial regions at
multiple scales for enhancing
model’s detection performance.
5.
Zhu et al. [27]
Spatial frequency
features
Video
ST-Transformer
FaceForensics++,
Celeb-DF, DFDC,
DeeperForensics,
and FaceShifter
ACC and AUC
∙Adopted two-stage
spatiotemporal encoder for
handling inconsistencies in highly
compressed videos.
∙Utilized knowledge distillation
to represent structural
information for deepfake
detection.
∙Temporal contrastive module to
enhance temporal correlation
information from videos.
6.
Liu et al. [76]
Channel specific,
channel
differential and
channel
invariant
features
Audio
BiLSTM
ASVspoof2019,
ASVspoof2021,
and VSDC
ACC, PR, RE,
F1-score, and
error rate
∙Exploited multi-space channel
representation learning for
detecting audio deepfakes.
∙Channel differential encoder for
extracting features by calculating
difference between two channels.
∙Utilized orthogonal and mutual
maximization loss information for
channel-specific encoders.
7.
Amin et al. [66]
CNN encoder
based facial
feature
extraction
Video
SpectraVisionFu-
sion Transformer
FaceForensics+,
DFDC,
Celeb-DF-v2, and
DeeperForensics-
1.0
ACC, AUC and
PR
∙Extracted spatial, frequency and
statistical features for improved
detection results.
∙Weighted features embedding
fusion for combining results from
different networks.
∙Squeezed convolution projection
in the multistage convolutional
token embedding layer.
8.
Gowrisankar and
Thing [6]
Saliency feature
map using
XceptionNet
Video
MesoNet
FaceForensics++
and Celeb-D
ACC and
computational
time
∙Selected and ranked important
facial regions for deepfake
detection.
∙Generated adversarial video
samples using NES with minimal
noise difference from the original
videos.
∙Utilized multiple explainability
tools to describe model’s black
box design.
(continued on next page)
Information Fusion 118 (2025) 102993 
15 


--- PAGE 16 ---

A. Kumar et al.
Table 6 (continued).
9.
Pu et al. [36]
Feature level
and frame-level
features
Video
ResNet50
Celeb-DF (v2),
Celeb-DF,
FaceForensics++
and DFDC
ACC, AUC, PR,
RE and F1-score
∙Handled data imbalance by
using sampling and data
augmentation techniques.
∙Utilized loss function to
minimize the AUC error and
cross-entropy loss.
∙Two separate classifiers for
classifying the feature level and
frame level outcomes.
10.
Kolagati et al.
[113]
CNN based
feature
extraction
Video
MLP
DFDC and Dessa
DB
ACC and AUC
∙CNN based feature extraction
for eye blink and lip, eye and
nose shape.
∙Utilized two-layered MLP
architecture with dense and
hidden layer ReLU activation
function.
∙Concatenated MLP and CNN
output using fully connected
dense layer followed by Sigmoid
activation function.
11.
Arshed et al.
[88]
Pre-trained
weights from
ImageNet DB
Image
ViT
Kaggle DB,
Online DB,
SFHQ, and SG
DB
ACC, PR, RE,
F1-score, and
support
∙Focused on multi-class
classification of deepfake images.
∙Curated SG DB for supporting
multi-class classification for better
accuracy.
∙Achieved detection ACC up to
99% during model validation and
testing.
12.
Awotunde et al.
[95]
Discriminant
spatial features
from DL model
Video
ReLU with CNN
DeepFake DB,
Face2Face DB,
and First order
motion DB
ACC, RE, PR,
F-Measure, error,
SPE and CM
∙Utilized CNN for extracting face
regions from video frames.
∙Enhanced CNN with ReLU for
extracting spatial information
used in identification of face
artifacts.
∙Fully connected layer with
neural network regularization for
model robustness.
13.
Ayman et al.
[69]
CNN based
feature map
Video
VGG-16
DFDC
ACC
∙Proposed deepfake generation
and detection to understand the
forgery regions.
∙Binary cross entropy to
determine the percentage of fake
and real production.
∙Achieved highest ACC (98%) in
CNN.
14.
Badale et al.
[96]
Frame level
features using
dense CNN
Image
CNN
SG
ACC
∙Detected pixel-level
manipulations using CNN.
∙Computed multiple ACC using
different loss functions and
optimizers.
15.
Coccomini et al.
[40]
Hierarchical
feature
representation
with
low-dimensional
features using
EfficientNet-V2
CNN
Video
ViT, and Swim
transformer
Pristine DB, and
SG
ACC, CM, and
AUC
∙Compared capabilities of
multiple DL models for detecting
deepfakes using two different
steps.
∙ViT shown superiority in
comparison to other models for
generalizability.
∙Inferred that scenario-specific
DL-models perform better.
16.
Guo et al. [89]
Hierarchical
feature
extraction for
high-level
features
Image
AMTENnet
FaceForensics++
and SG hybrid
fake face DB
ACC, CM and
RER
∙Learned manipulation traces
adaptively using backpropagation
method.
∙Integrated AMTN with CNN for
robust model representation.
∙Applied post-processing
techniques for simulating model
under complex scenarios.
(continued on next page)
To provide a generalization set up for deepfakes detection, au-
thors exploited three network architectures namely, CNN, ViT, and
swim transformer [40]. The performance of these network architectures
was analyzed and compared individually. CNN utilized EfficientNetV2-
M and swim transformer to transform the hierarchical features into
low-level features with attentional mechanisms. CNN showed efficient
performance on limited training datasets whereas ViT showed superior
results on large and diversified datasets. The swim transformer showed
context-based generalized and promising results in both scenarios. Guo
et al. [89] proposed adaptive manipulation traces using a convolutional
Information Fusion 118 (2025) 102993 
16 


--- PAGE 17 ---

A. Kumar et al.
Table 6 (continued).
17.
Mcuba et al. [7]
MFCC,
Mel-spectrum,
Chromagram,
and spectrogram
Audio
Custom DL
architecture
Baidu Silicon
Valley AI Lab DB
ACC
∙Used different optimizers with
variable learning rate to
determine model accuracy.
∙Custom model achieved 100%
ACC in complex scenarios.
∙Smaller DB size restricted the
generalizability of the model
analysis.
18.
Lima et al. [75]
Spatio-temporal
features
Video
Recurrent CNN,
ResNet-3D, C3D,
ResNet Mixed
3D-2D, ResNet
(2+1)D and I3D
Celeb-DF V2
ACC, and AUC
∙Applied random cropping and
temporal jittering to all video
frames for extracting important
information.
∙Exploited benefits of temporal
features for deepfake
classification.
∙R3D achieved highest ACC
(98.26%) in comparison to other
networks.
19.
Yan et al. [61]
Global features
Video
Convolutional
autoencoder
transformer
UADFV,
FaceForensics++,
Celeb-DF v2,
DFDC, and
DeepfakeTIMIT
AUC and CM
∙Optimized encoder using back
propagated information from
various tasks.
∙Utilized latent vectors in
shallow linear network for
prediction.
∙Verified model generalizability
with cross-domain validation.
20.
Wodajo et al.
[65]
CNN based
feature
extraction
Video
Convolution ViT
DFDC
ACC
∙Combined the capabilities of
both CNN and transformers.
∙Local features learned from
CNN whereas global and local
features learned from ViT.
∙Model achieved ACC (91.5%)
on test dataset.
DB: Dataset DFDC: Deepfake Detection Challenge LSTM: Long Short-Term Memory AMTE: Adaptive Manipulation Traces Extraction SFHQ: Synthetic Faces High Quality ViT: Vision
Transformer ReLU: Rectified Linear Unit MLP: Multilayer Perceptron CNN: Convolutional Neural Network ACC: Accuracy AUC: Area Under the Curve PR: Precision RE: Recall SPE:
Specificity CM: Confusion Matrix RER: Relative Error Reduction.
layer for generalized fake face detection architecture. Maxpool, ReLU,
layers, and batch normalization were utilized after each convolutional
layer for introducing non-linearity and preventing model over-fitting.
The classification network consisted of three fully connected layers for
determining whether facial images as real or manipulated. In [96],
the author extracted features using CNN by applying a 2D convolution
operation on 9 pixels of image regions. The prediction was done by
applying a classification model to determine the class of the image. On
the other hand, Awotunde et al. [95] proposed a five-layered CNN for
detecting deepfakes. Enhanced CNN with ReLU for extracting the robust
features from the facial region. The classification model comprised
of ADAM optimizer and mean square error to calculate the loss and
improve model stability and accuracy.
In another direction of research, Khalid et al. [34] utilized a graph
neural network for deepfake detection. The network consisted of two
stages namely GraphNet for updating and aggregating graph informa-
tion, and FFN for linear transformation of the nodes. PReLU activation
function for improving model performance and addressing vanishing
gradient problem. The author proposed to generate a saliency map
by segmenting the facial regions [6]. XceptionNet and MesoNet were
utilized for training models and feature extraction, respectively. Ex-
plainability tools interpreted the model architecture to estimate the
parameters for the adversarial generated sample. In [69], authors gen-
erated feature maps using CNN and processed the extracted features
using VGG-16. CNN utilized a pooling layer for downsampling to re-
duce the network parameters and a fully connected layer for final video
classification as real or fake. Authors extracted spatial and temporal
features for deepfake detection [75].
Detecting deepfake audio is challenging as the cloned audios learn
similar features and characteristics that are tough to recognize. To
address this, Mcuba et al. [7] extracted audio features and repre-
sented them using visual features namely, MFCC, Mel-spectrum, chro-
matogram, 
and 
spectrogram. 
The 
performance 
of 
multiple
DL-algorithms was analyzed and compared. It was observed that
VGG16 performed better for MFCC audio features whereas custom
architectures performed best for the rest of the features. However, au-
thors proposed to detect deepfakes audio by representing the channel-
specific, channel invariant, and channel differential features in multi-
space channel [76]. The differences and commonalities between the
two channels namely, the left and right audio were analyzed and clas-
sified using BiLSTM and a fully connected layer. A dynamic weighted
fusion was adopted for generating joint features in a multi-space
feature aggregation module before being fed to the ADD classifier. This
classifier consisted of 1D-CNN, a fully connected layer, and sigmoid
activation for predicting fake speech. Spatial features were extracted
using CNN whereas LSTM was for extracting temporal features. These
features were processed using 3D CNN, ResNet (2+1)D, Inflated incep-
tion V1, and RCNN. The results from these networks were compared to
obtain an efficient network with better accuracy.
To summarize, DL-based models for deepfake detection demon-
strated satisfactory performance by extracting deep features. These
features were processed either using DL-models or transformers. Pre-
trained models are utilized for performing feature evaluation to im-
prove the computational efficiency of the model. ViT transformer is
one of the efficient networks consisting of an encoder layer and a
decoding layer. The decoding layer is followed by a classification
network for classifying the audio, video, and images as manipulated or
real. Apart from this, Swim transformers have also shown efficient and
accurate classification accuracy. The model efficiently processed and
classified the various multimedia content and detected the discrepancy
efficiently.
5.2. Hybrid fusion-based algorithms
Table 7 tabulates the representative work categorized as hybrid
algorithms for deepfake detection. These algorithms utilized multiple
Information Fusion 118 (2025) 102993 
17 


--- PAGE 18 ---

A. Kumar et al.
DL-model for feature extraction and processing. The classification mod-
ule can utilize either the DL model or ML model for classifying various
contents as real or fake. In this direction, Dincer et al. [37] utilized
three pre-trained DL-models for feature extraction using transfer learn-
ing and two capsule networks for feature processing and classification.
A frame selection strategy was adopted to select the suitable feature
frame for feature extraction to improve detection performance and
processing time. The classification scores from each capsule network
were integrated using the mean fusion strategy to obtain a fused score
for classification decision-making. Authors proposed hybrid CNN for ex-
tracting frame-level features from the selected video [70]. Hybrid CNN
comprised two DL networks namely, InceptionResNet v2 with 22 con-
volutional layers, and 5 pooling layers, and Xception with depth-wise
separable convolutional layers. The InceptionResNet v2 was followed
by Xception network for feature extraction from pre-processed videos
and then the classification module generated classification results. Sim-
ilarly, the author ensembled two pretrained CNNs and a bidirectional
LSTM network for detecting deepfakes [80]. Frame-level features were
extracted using a customized network consisting of InceptionResNet
v1 and InceptionResNet v2. These features trained the BiLSTM for the
classification of deepfake videos using the majority voting rule. The
network performance was optimized using bio-inspired spotted hyena.
Highly realistic fake videos that are hard to detect can be detected
by adopting hybrid networks. For this, the authors proposed a hybrid
approach by integrating you only look once (YOLO) v3, CNN, and
XGBoost [62]. YOLO detected the facial regions from the video frames.
Spatial features were extracted using pre-trained InceptionResNet v2
CNN. The classifier module was constructed using an ML-based XG-
Boost algorithm. Naskar et al. [68] presented a staking-based ensemble
approach in which features were extracted using two DL networks
namely, XceptionNet and EfficientNet-B7. Ranking based feature se-
lection strategy was adopted to select the top-performing features.
The classification module utilized a meta-learning approach based on
MLP algorithms capturing non-linear relationships between features for
improved classification accuracy. Xu et al. [48] proposed a set CNN for
detecting facial manipulated videos using XceptionNet and MesoNet as
backbone networks. Set reduce was utilized for aggregating the frame
level and set level features. Multi-way backbone network branches were
concatenated using a fusion module before classification.
In order to improve the detection performance in low-quality im-
ages, authors proposed to transform extracted features into higher-
quality images using U-net [117]. Features were extracted using mod-
ified EfficientNet and adversarial training along with a discriminator
was adopted for determining the quality of transformed features. The
classification module was constructed using CNN consisting of convo-
lution and a fully connected layer followed by softmax activation. The
authors analyzed the local and global context of the video using three
transformers namely, dual attention ViT, Inception, and group propa-
gation ViT [38]. Dual attention ViT extracted contextual information,
the frequency spectrum was broadened using an Inception transformer,
and high-resolution features were retained using group propagation
ViT. The outcome of these transformers was fused using an MLP
mixer and then passed through a dense layer for classification. Qadir
et al. [24] proposed a hybrid network consisting of three networks as
ResNet-Swish-Bidirectional LSTM. Spatiotemporal data was processed
by integrating bidirectional LSTM in ResNet-18 architecture. The swish
activation method optimized the network and improved its feature
selection and recall capabilities.
In [116], authors proposed a hybrid model for deepfake detection
extracting face texture and naturalness degree. The texture was ex-
tracted using CNN and the naturalness degree was built using deep
neural networks. Critical 68 landmarks were identified from the fa-
cial regions to extract these features. The model concatenated the
outcome of all neurons from the naturalness degree model and used
this for classification. Raza et al. [63] presented a hybrid approach
of CNN-VGG16 along with transfer learning architecture for deep-
fake detection. Transfer learning architecture such as Xception, Neural
search architecture network, MobileNet, and VGG16 models for feature
extraction. CNN was involved in extracting pixel-level information
and fully connected layers were combined to classify the outcomes.
Authors stacked multiple DL models such as MobileNet, ResNet101,
Inception v3, DenseNet121, InceptionResNet v2, DenseNet169, and
Xception using ImageNet weights for deep fake classification [86]. The
outcome of these models was concatenated and passed through CNN
based classifier for making predictions. On the other hand, the authors
combined the strength of CNN and GAN in a two-step approach for
obtaining efficient prediction results [25]. Initially, GAN identified the
discriminative parts in the synthetic images followed by the CNN model
to improve the classification accuracy for forged images. GAN-based
discriminator consisted of five convolutional layers and a LeakyReLU
activation function whereas CNN had two convolutional layers and a
ReLU activation function. Fully connected layers acted as a classifier for
obtaining the outcome. Similarly, Sharma et al. [98] ensembled CNN-
GAN to determine the deepfake generated using generative modeling.
GAN was trained using real image datasets whereas CNN was trained
on merged datasets. After this, the DCGAN network was adopted con-
sisting of a generator and discriminator along with cross entropy for
distinguishing between fake and real images.
Automatic reliable detection of deepfakes is essential to predict the
forged content quickly. In this direction, Zhang et al. [91] ensem-
bled 3D CNN and CNN-RNN (Recurrent neural network) for extracting
discriminative spatial–temporal features and processing them for ef-
ficient deepfake detection. The network performance was optimized
using PSO (Particle swarm optimization). A weighted scheme was
adopted for integrating the outcome from these networks and classi-
fiers were selected for classifying the outcome. Authors segmented the
various facial regions (68 landmarks) for extracting the features using
OpenFace2 [60]. The multiple detection models namely, CNN, capsule
network, and DSP-FWA were utilized for processing these features.
These features were concatenated using two different fusion approaches
namely, model fusion and feature fusion. The fusion approach was
based on weighted fusion to obtain the final score fed to the classifier.
In [9], authors utilized two networks namely CNN and LSTM for
extracting spatial and temporal features. These features were exported
to the training model and prediction was done on the testing model.
Authors ensembled CNN models with SVM and KNN for obtaining
the accurate classification accuracy [100]. Error level analysis was
performed to determine the compression level of the processed image.
Features were extracted using transfer learning from two CNN models
namely AlexNet and ShuffleNet. The features were fed to the ML
classifiers namely, SVM and KNN for obtaining the accuracy values.
Determining the specific regions that were manipulated is challeng-
ing and requires in-depth analysis. To analyze such regions, authors
studied the boundaries of the input data and processed and classi-
fied them using pre-trained DL model [115]. Acoustic features from
frame-level boundaries were extracted using ResNet-1D and 1D-CNN
networks. These features were classified using a backend classifier
consisting of a transformer encoder and bidirectional LSTM. In other
directions, Khochare et al. [67] ensembled DL models extracting im-
age features and ML models extracting audio features for deepfake
detection. Mel spectrogram images were generated from audio signals
using two DL models namely, temporal CNN and spatial transformer
network. Temporal CNN was used in classification networks with vary-
ing kernel sizes, dropout, and batch normalization. For feature-based
classification, 37 audio features were extracted and classified using ML
algorithms namely, SVM, KNN, RF, XGBoost, and Light GB. DL-based
models had shown better performance in comparison to ML-based
models. To maintain the interpretability of the model for detecting
deepfake audio, authors used three DL-models namely, CNN, CNN-
LSTM, and CNN-LSTM-permuted [122]. The audio data was converted
to mel spectrogram images and features were extracted using CNN.
Information Fusion 118 (2025) 102993 
18 


--- PAGE 19 ---

A. Kumar et al.
Table 7
Single modal advanced fusion-based deepfake detection techniques with hybrid algorithms.
SN
Citation
Features
Modality
Fusion Strategy
Dataset
Performance
metrics
Summary
1.
Essa [38]
Low frequency
and
high-resolution
group features
Video
Dual attention
ViT, Group
propagation ViT,
and Inception
transformer
FaceForensics++
and Celeb-DF
ACC, PR, RE,
F1-score, and
AUC
∙Comprehensive analysis of
videos using multiple ViT
networks.
∙Integrated features using MLP
network to improve detection
capabilities.
∙Achieved highest ACC (97.72%)
on benchmark DB.
2.
Cai and Li [115]
ResNet-1D for
frame-level
features
Audio
Transformer and
BiLSTM
ADD2022-T2,
ADD2023-T2,
and PartialSpoof
Error rate and
F1-score
∙Extracted diverse deep features
from pre-trained models.
∙Integrated results from multiple
models for determining spoofed
audio.
∙Limited performance to
generalize results on unseen and
cross-domain DB.
3.
Jayashre and
Amsaprabhaa
[80]
Deep features
Video
InceptionRes-
NetV1,
InceptionRes-
NetV2, and
BiLSTM
Kaggle DB,
FaceForensics++,
and
FakeAVCeleb
ACC, PR, RE,
F1-score, Loss
and AUC
∙Obtained fused feature by
integrating hidden features
extracted from InceptionResNetV1
and InceptionResNetV2.
∙Optimized network weights
using spotted hyena optimizer.
∙Utilized majority voting for
classifying videos as fake or real.
4.
Dincer et al.
[37]
Feature
extraction using
VGG19,
EfficientNet B0,
and EfficientNet
B4
Video
CapsuleNet and
ArCapsNet
Celeb-DF and
DFDC-P
ACC, PR, RE,
F1-score, and
AUC
∙Frame selection by investigating
golden ratio from the facial
regions.
∙Fused features extracted from
multiple deep neural networks.
∙Exploited two capsule networks
in the classification models for
detecting deepfakes.
5.
Khochare et al.
[67]
Feature-level
extraction and
image-level
extraction
Audio
SVM, RF,
XGBoost, KNN,
LGBM, STN and
TCN
Fake or Real DB
and
self-generated
audios
ACC, PR, RE,
F1-score
∙Implemented feature-level
extraction and image-level
extraction for detecting deepfake
audios.
∙Feature-based approach utilized
ML algorithms and image-level
approach used DL methods.
∙SVM achieved ACC (67%) and
TCN acquired ACC (92%).
6.
Chew et al.
[116]
Texture and
naturalness
degree
Image
Deep CNN
Flickr-Faces-HQ,
StyleGan2,
FaceForensics++,
and Celeb-DFv2
ACC, PR, RE,
and F1-score
∙Utilized hybrid model for
extracting deep texture and
naturalness degree from facial
regions.
∙Achieved highest ACC (99.7%)
on benchmark DB.
7.
Zhang et al. [91]
3D CNN
extracting spatial
and temporal
features
Video
PSO optimized
CNN-RNN and
3D CNN
Celeb-DFv2,
FaceForensics++,
and Deepfakes
ACC, MCC, and
AUC
∙Exploited Inceptionv3-RNN
network as encoder–decoder
architecture.
∙Inflated 3D ConvNet and MC3
networks as 3D CNN for feature
extraction.
∙PSO optimized the network
hyperparameters for video
authenticity.
8.
Ke and Wang
[117]
Deep features
using modified
EfficientNet
Images
U-net and CNN
DFDC, Celeb-DF,
FaceForensics++,
and Wild
Deepfake
ACC
∙Utilized transforming module to
improve the quality of the
features extracted from degraded
quality images.
∙Assessed upgraded quality of
the images using a discriminator.
∙Utilized ML algorithms such as
SVM and Bayes classifier for
classifying the input data.
(continued on next page)
These features were processed using the LSTM network and attribution
scores were calculated using integrated gradients. Model explainabil-
ity was achieved using Taylor decomposition and speech was recon-
structed using Griffin-Lim algorithms. Model detection performance
was calibrated on multiple audio deepfake datasets.
To summarize, hybrid approaches utilized multiple DL algorithms
and transformer networks for extracting various frame-level and facial
region features. The boundary level features were also analyzed to
Information Fusion 118 (2025) 102993 
19 


--- PAGE 20 ---

A. Kumar et al.
Table 7 (continued).
9.
Naskar et al.
[68]
Dual CNN
models
Videos
Ensembled
Xception and
EfficientNet-B7
FaceForensics++
and Celeb-DF V2
ACC, PR, RE,
AUC, F1-score,
and CM
∙Adopted feature selection
strategy by averaging the feature
importance scores.
∙Arranged features in descending
order to select the valuable
features.
∙Meta learning applied on
stacked features along with MLP.
10.
Qadir et al. [24]
Feature
extraction from
ResNet layers
Video
ResNet-Swish-
BiLSTM
FaceForensics++,
Celeb-DF and
DFDC
ACC, PR, RE,
AUC, F1-score,
and CM
∙Examined cross-compilation
check among DB to determine
model generalizability.
∙Hybrid and optimized DL
architecture based on BiLSTM and
residual network for robust model
architecture.
∙Visual features in neurons to
prevent the model from
cyber-attacks.
11.
Raza et al. [63]
Learned features
from TL
Image
Hybrid VGG and
CNN
DF DB from
Kaggle
ACC, Loss, PR,
RE, SPE,
F1-score, CM,
and GME
∙TL-based models for comparing
the outcomes of the proposed
model.
∙Tuned hyperparameters to
determine fine-tune values.
∙Computed performance on
unseen DB from the 10% testing
DB.
12.
Ikram et al. [70]
InceptionRes-
NetV2 CNN and
Xception
Video
Hybrid CNN
DFDC
ACC, PR, RE,
AUC, F1-score,
and support
∙Utilized InceptionResNetV2 and
Xception in hybrid CNN model.
∙Global average pooling and
softmax layer in the final
processing layer.
∙Hybrid model achieved
validation ACC (93%).
13.
Ismail et al. [62]
InceptionRes-
NetV2 CNN
Video
YOLO-CNN-
XGBoost
CelebDF-
FaceForensics++
ACC, AUC, PR,
RE, SPE, SEN,
F1-measure, and
CM
∙Spatial features extracted from
CNN network classified using
XGBoost.
∙Stochastic gradient for
optimizing the model for faster
convergence.
∙Validated the model
generalizability with cross-domain
DB.
14.
Rafique et al.
[100]
Deep CNN
features
Image
AlexNet,
ShuffleNet, KNN,
and SVM
Computational
Intelligence
Photography
Lab, Yonsei
University
ACC, RE, PR,
and F1-score
∙Error level analysis to compare
the compression of fake and real
images.
∙Utilized DL-models for feature
extraction and ML for
classification into real and fake.
∙Achieved highest ACC (88.2%)
in hybrid ShuffleNet and KNN
model.
15.
Rana and Sung
[86]
Seven DL models
Video
CNN as meta
learner
classification
FaceForensics++
ACC, AUC, PR,
RE, F1-score,
SPE, and SEN
∙Ensembled multiple DL-models
as base learners for feature
extraction.
∙Utilized DeepFakeStackClassifier
as meta learner before final
prediction.
∙Achieved ACC (99.6%) on
exploited public dataset.
16.
Sadhna et al.
[25]
Hierarchical
feature
Image
CNN and GAN
Public DB
ACC, Loss, and
CM
∙Compared between real and
fake images along with
machine-generated fake images.
∙Hybrid model achieved ACC
(94.4%).
17.
Sharma et al.
[98]
Deep features
Image
CNN and GAN
DFDC
ACC, AUC, PR,
RE, F1-score,
support, and CM
∙Utilized transpose convolutional
to reduce the features dimensions.
∙Randomly cropped images
normalized using batch
normalization.
∙Achieved ACC (98.67%) on
Kaggle DB.
(continued on next page)
Information Fusion 118 (2025) 102993 
20 


--- PAGE 21 ---

A. Kumar et al.
Table 7 (continued).
18.
Tolosana et al.
[60]
Deep features
from facial
regions
Video
Xception,
Capsule network,
and DSP-FWA
UADFV,
FaceForensics++,
Celeb-DF, and
DFDC
ACC, AUC, and
error rate
∙Extracted deep features from
facial regions such as eyes, nose,
mouth, etc.
∙Fusion classification model
using multiple DL models and
face-level.
∙Achieved 100% AUC on UADFV
DB.
19.
Vamsi et al. [9]
ResNext CNN for
frame-level
features
Video
ResNext CNN +
LSTM
Celeb-DFv2
AUC and CM
∙Feature extraction using ResNet
and temporal analysis using
LSTM.
∙Achieved average ACC (91%).
20.
Xu et al. [48]
XceptionNet
Video
XceptionNet and
MesoNet
TIMIT,
FaceForensics++,
and DFDC
ACC, and AUC
∙Utilized set reduce method for
aggregating features of elements
in a set.
∙Statistical features for
characterizing permutation
invariance.
∙Processed multiple video frames
as a set for detecting manipulated
videos.
21.
Lim et al. [122]
CNN-based
spectrogram-
based features
Audio
CNN-LSTM-perm
ASVspoof2021
Logical Access
DB, and
LJSpeech DB
Attribution score
∙Interpreted attribution score of
audios to identify deepfake.
∙Focused on explainable model
rather than model performance.
∙Utilized Griffin-Lim algorithm
for phase reconstruction-rule
based vocoders.
DB: Dataset, DL: Deep learning, ML: Machine learning, ViT: Vision transformer, LSTM: Long short-term memory, MLP: Multilayer perceptron, DFDC: Deepfake detection challenge,
CNN: Convolutional neural network, RNN: Recurrent neural network, KNN: k-Nearest neighbor, SVM: Support vector machine, RF: Random forest, LGBM: Light gradient boosting
machines, TCN: Temporal convolutional network, STN: Spatial transformer network, RNN: Recurrent neural network, PSO: Particle swarm optimization, GRU: Gated recurrent unit,
BiLSTM: Bidirectional LSTM, TL: Transfer learning, ACC: Accuracy, PR: Precision, RE: Recall, GMS: Geometric mean score, MCC: Mean convergence curve, AUC: Area under the
curve, CM: Confusion matrix, SPE: Specificity, SEN: Sensitivity.
determine the manipulation in specific regions. The extracted features
were processed and classified using DL-models or ML-models. Feature
selection strategy was adopted to maintain the computational com-
plexity of the model. Model explainability and interpretability were
explored to determine the difference between the model prediction and
human perception.
6. Multimodal deepfake detection
Multimodal deepfake detection emphasizes incorporating multiple
modalities such as audio, video, images, and text in the input fea-
tures for detecting manipulation in practical scenarios. Multimodal
deepfake detection techniques can be categorized either as DL-based
approaches or ensembled approaches. Synthetic-generated multimedia
can be detected using DL architectures, transformers, and integrating
the outcome using fusion approaches for classification. The generic
architecture of multimodal deepfake detection algorithms is illustrated
in Fig. 9. Table 8 tabulates the representative work categorized under
this class of deepfake detection algorithms. The next section will detail
the DL-models for deepfake detection.
6.1. Deep learning-based techniques
This subsection will detail the multi-modal deepfake detection al-
gorithms in which DL-model was exploited for feature detection, pro-
cessing, and classification. In this direction, Yoon et al. [50] processed
triple modality namely, text, video, and audio using a multimodal
transformer. The transformer comprised of two stages including feature
extraction and representation along with residual connection and late
fusion. The visual feature loss due to the interaction of three modalities
was prevented using the ReLU activation function. The distillation
tokens and multimodality data scores were extracted and fused to
obtain classifier probability for detecting deepfakes. In [49], authors
extracted features from multimodality, audio, and video and fused them
using the Intramodality mixer layer and Intermodality mixer layer.
Audio features were sampled and learned using residual blocks whereas
multiple residual and pooling layers were used for extracting video
frames. The mixed features were passed to multilabel prediction heads
to learn patches for classification as real or fake.
To prevent the uncertainties in models trained on fused multimodal
data, authors proposed cross-modality and within-modality regulariza-
tion learning [74]. Audio and visual were extracted separately using
frame-level encoders and concatenated using AV-Hubert. Contrastive
learning along with cosine similarity to determine the similarities
between the audio and visual features. Within modality, regulariza-
tion was achieved using modality-specific regularization consisting of
margin-based regularization. Weighted cross entropy loss to optimize
loss and detect deepfakes. On the other hand, authors generated intra-
modal consistency loss and cross-modal consistency loss for detect-
ing deepfakes [29]. Intra-modality loss determined the divergence be-
tween the feature vectors from different modalities and generated
similarity scores. Whereas cross-modality extracted motion inconsisten-
cies learned various feature extractors and generated similarity scores.
These two scores were summed to obtain the final score for deepfake
detection.
In [90], authors exploited pre-trained fine-tuned ViT for extracting
video clips and audio spectrum from audio and visual data. Two
additional modules adaptive forgery-aware injection and audio-distilled
cross-modal interaction were stacked in each ViT for extracting intra-
modal embeddings. The results were fed to the MLP-based classifier to
detect the fake or real samples. On the other hand, authors proposed
ViT with Xception network for learning the consistency in video and
images from the entire facial regions [39]. The local features were
extracted by combining ViT and self-attention module whereas global
spatial features were extracted using deep CNN. These features were
stacked, fused, and classified using a classification layer consisting of
the ReLU activation function to generate the probability of classifying it
as fake or real. Ilyas et al. [83] extracted hierarchical features using the
Swim transformer module for representing the local and contextual in-
formation from the video and audio modalities. The consecutive Swim
Information Fusion 118 (2025) 102993 
21 


--- PAGE 22 ---

A. Kumar et al.
Fig. 9. Generic architecture of multi-modal deepfake detection algorithms.
transformer blocks represented the ST network comprising of layer
normalization, multi-head self-attention module, residual network, and
MLP module. MLP was four layered modules consisting of two identical
layers, ReLU and dropout along with a dense layer for classification.
Also, the authors proposed an effective method that can detect
multimodalities, audio, and videos together as well as can detect them
individually in low-quality and corrupted videos [123]. The person
of interest was identified, and discriminative features were learned
using contrastive learning. The similarity indices were computed and
fused linearly by averaging to obtain the fused scores for classifica-
tion. Haq et al. [99] extracted emotions and psychological features
for determining the inter and intra inconsistencies between the multi-
modalities namely, audio and video. Emotions were identified and
extracted using a DL network with multiple convolutional layers hav-
ing ReLU, max pooling, and batch normalization. Speech emotions
were recognized with seven basic emotions by tuning hyperparameters.
Intra-modality reasoning computed the probability for two constitutive
emotional states whereas inter-modality reasoning was determined by
representing it in the arousal valence dimension. These modalities were
classified by using probability labels for each reasoning module and
explained using Grad-CAM. In [93], authors utilized the Xception net-
work along with bidirectional LSTM for extracting multi-frame features.
Audio waveforms were processed using SincNet and the detection task
was processed using the final classifier. After this, a discrete Fourier
transform was applied on images to extract the power spectrum for
separating the fake from the real using a trained MLP classifier.
To summarize, pre-trained DL networks and transformers were used
for extracting the robust features from the considered multi-modalities.
The intra-domain and inter-domain modalities were processed to deter-
mine the inconsistencies between the modalities. The modalities score
was fused using DL-based or MLP classifier for the classification of
modalities as fake or real.
6.2. Ensembled fusion-based techniques
These techniques utilized multiple DL-models to extract robust fea-
tures and multiple fusion modules to effectively utilize the extracted
information. The results were ensembled to generate the final robust
score for deepfake classification. In this direction, Yan et al. [53]
utilized two GNN (Graph neural networks) to extract geometric en-
hanced landmark features namely, spatial, frequency, and temporal.
Multi-scale Xception network was used for extracting spatial features.
Temporal information was encoded and inconsistencies between frames
were determined by using a graph attention network at the video level.
Unified features were generated from different frequencies and fused
using a learnable weight matrix. Global and local temporal dependen-
cies at the video level from each attentional module were concatenated
using a weighted sum of attentional weights from each node feature.
Cross-modal classifier along with loss functions was concatenated to
reduce the inter-class noise for deepfakes detection [118]. The temporal
and spatial encoders processed the sampled audio and video through
patch data processing. The multimodal decoder fused the extracted
features using their inherent relationship. The output of the multimodal
decoder was computed through cross cross-modality classifier using
contrastive, cross-entropy, and angular margin loss. These losses were
fused linearly to obtain the final classifier outcome. Similarly, authors
utilized two fusion strategies namely, feature fusion and score fusion
before feeding to the four-class classification network [51]. The multi-
task learning utilized fusing three loss functions namely, cross-entropy
loss for audio, video, and four classes with different types of videos.
Feature fusion generated a fused feature vector after extracting features
from the capsule network and Swim transformer.
Further, multimodal contrastive learning was utilized for extracting
intra-frame and cross-modal for determining forgery clues [41]. Three
modalities namely, audio, video, and images were extracted along with
audio and images extracted for the cross-modality gap. Intra-modal
similarities from the ST network were predicted using Jensen–Shannon
divergence. The contrastive loss enhanced feature representation by
concatenating the audio with video information. Noise-based adaptive
feature augmentation to improve the model generalizability capabili-
ties. Authors extracted facial features from the VGG-16 network and
audio from a transformer encoder with a self-attentional network [64].
The spatiotemporal dimensions were captured using tubelet embedding
and simplified computing cross-attention between lip region and audio
temporal synchronization. The classification module consisted of MLP
to generate the final classification probability for real and fake.
In other directions, authors utilized different networks for extract-
ing multimodalities and different fusion strategies to detect the deep-
fakes [52]. Visual modalities were extracted using modified ensembled
EfficientNetB4 and audio modalities were extracted using pre-trained
time-delay neural networks provided by SpeechBrain. The time consis-
tency between both these feature vectors was recorded by extracting
Information Fusion 118 (2025) 102993 
22 


--- PAGE 23 ---

A. Kumar et al.
Table 8
Multi-modal deepfake detection techniques.
SN
Citation
Features
Modality
Technique
Dataset
Performance
metrics
Summary
1.
Liu et al. [41]
DL-based feature
extraction
Audio, image
and video
Multimodal
contrastive
learning
DF-TIMIT,DFDC,
FakeAVCeleb,
KoDF
AUC, ACC
∙Adopted student–teacher
network for extracting
multi-modal features.
∙Utilized noise-based adaptive
feature augmentation for better
generalizability.
∙Calculated feature mapping
using MLP.
2.
Yoon et al. [50]
Transformer for
extracting vision
and audio
features
Vision, audio
and text
TMI-Former
FakeAVCeleb
ACC, F1-score
∙Triple modalities processed in
two stages consisting of visual
and auditory features.
∙Residual connections for
handling the features from vision,
audio, and text.
∙Integrated the extracted
multi-modalities using late-level
fusion.
3.
Yang et al. [118]
Temporal and
spatial features
Audio and video
Multi-modal
joint decoder
DefakeAVMiT,
FakeAVCeleb,
DFDC
AUC, ACC
∙Generated DB by combining
videos and audio from multiple
different DB.
∙Jointly learned the features
extracted from different encoders.
∙Cross-modal classifiers for
identifying deepfake videos.
4.
Lewis et al. [82]
Color visual
embedding,
spectral
embedding,
LipNet, and
audio features
Video and audio
LSTM
DFDC
ACC
∙Analyzed misalignment between
audio and videos for deepfake
detection.
∙Utilized DCT for capturing
spectral features in frequency
domain.
∙Inconsistencies between
DeepSpeech2 and LipNet features
explored using contrastive loss.
5.
Ganguly et al.
[39]
Deep CNN based
features
Image and Video
ViT with
XceptionNet
FaceForensics++,
Celeb-DF (V2),
Deepfake DB
ACC, AUC, PR,
RE, F1-score, CM
∙Patch-wise attentional module
for learning local features.
∙Pre-trained Xception network
for extracting global spatial image
features.
∙Dense layer-based classification
network for detecting deepfakes.
6.
Ilyas et al. [83]
Dense
hierarchical
features
Audio and video
Swin transformer
FakeAVCeleb,
Celeb-DF,
ASVSpoof-2019 LA,
World Leaders DB,
Presidential
Deepfakes DB
ACC, AUC, PR,
RE, F1-score,
error rate
∙Extracted deep hierarchical
features for robust representation
of model.
∙Adopted majority voting for
classifying fake from real.
∙Fully connected layer along
with softmax activation in the
output block.
7.
Lomnitz et al.
[93]
Xception
Audio and video
Ensembled
model:
EfficientNet,
Xception,
ResNet, SlowFast
video-based
network
DFDC
BCELoss
∙Feature encoding using MTCNN
and XceptionNet.
∙Frame-by-frame feature
extraction from single to multiple
frames.
∙MTCNN for ensembling different
models for deepfake detection
along with three 3D CNN.
8.
Nie et al. [90]
Task-specific
features
including audio
and visual
Audio and
Images
Forgery aware
audio distilled
multimodal
learning
FakeAVCeleb,
KoDF,
DeAVMiT,
DFDC
AUC, ACC
∙Utilized learnable parameters
from ViT transformer.
∙Audio-distilled cross-modal
interaction for handling
inconsistencies between audio
and visuals.
∙Experimental analysis to prove
the model scalability for superior
detection outcome.
(continued on next page)
them for equally spaced time instants on the same number of frames.
Before classification, the feature vectors were fused using three strate-
gies namely, late, mid, and early. In late fusion, separate classifiers for
each feature vector and vector were averaged to obtain the final score.
Similarly, separate classifiers were used in the mid fusion and results
were merged using the dense layer. However, a unique classifier was
considered in late fusion, and concatenated feature vectors were fed to
it to obtain the final detection results.
Information Fusion 118 (2025) 102993 
23 


--- PAGE 24 ---

A. Kumar et al.
Table 8 (continued).
9.
Muppala et al.
[51]
Capsule network
and Swin
transformer
Audio and video
Multi-task
learning
FakeAVCeleb,
TMC DB
AUC, ACC
∙Extracted deep features to learn
powerful features for model
implementation.
∙Utilized three loss functions in
multi-task model learning.
∙Four-class classification for
detecting deepfakes.
10.
Kharel et al.
[64]
VGG16
Audio and video
Self
attention-based
transformer
DFDC,
DF-TIMIT,
FakeAVCeleb DB
AUC, F1-score
∙Analyzed lip synchronization
between audio and visual
artifacts.
∙Self-attention applied on video
and cross-attention deployment
for lip-video synchronization.
∙Final class labels for
classification were generated by
MLP.
11.
Haq et al. [99]
Pretrained facial
expression
recognition and
speech emotion
recognition
Audio and video
DL-based model
DFDC,WLD
ACC, CM
∙Introduced biological signals to
determine the emotion
inconsistencies.
∙Analyzed intra-modality and
inter-modality reasoning for
robust outcomes.
∙Focused on explaining the
model using DL-based
explainability models.
12.
Cozzolino et al.
[123]
Contrastive
based feature
learning
Audio and video
POI-based
detection
pDFDC,
DF-TIMIT,
FakeAVCelebV2,
KoDF
AUC, ACC
∙Analyzed moving face and
audio as discriminative identity
for deepfake detection.
∙Robust model against
low-quality or corrupted DB.
∙Evaluated and analyzed model
flexibility, robustness, and
generalizability.
13.
Zou et al. [74]
Frame-level
audio-video
features using
encoders
Audio and video
Audio–visual
transformer
FakeAVCeleb
AUC, ACC, PR,
RE, F1-score
∙Cross-modality regularization
module for pairing audio-video
signals and preserve modality
distinctly.
∙Target-specific modality to
retain modality information.
∙Cross-entropy loss function to
optimize deepfake output.
14.
Yan et al. [53]
Geometric
enhanced
landmark
features
Images and
videos
Graph attention
network
FaceForensic++,
DeepfakeDetection,
CelebDF
AUC, ACC, error
∙Multiple modalities extracted
using two GANs.
∙Highly complex model not
suitable for real-time applications.
∙Generalizability proved using
cross-dataset assessment but
limited to considered modalities
only.
15.
Tian et al. [29]
Consistency-
based feature
and joint
features
Audio and video
Transformer
VoxCeleb2,
FakeAVCeleb,
KoDF
ACC, AUC
∙Calculated cross-modal
consistency loss from similarity
matrix.
∙Intra and cross-modality scores
compared for classification.
∙Model generalizability on
multiple DB for adversarial
attacks.
16.
Salvi et al. [52]
High level
pixel-level
features from
video and audio
Audio and video
Time aware
neural network
FaceForensics++,
ASVspoof 2019,
VidTIMIT,
DeepfakeTIMIT,
TIMIT- TTS
AUC, CM
∙Time series audio and video
features extracted for analysis.
∙Trained model on synthetic
audio and video DB.
∙Evaluated model performance
on unseen DB for model
generalizability.
(continued on next page)
To summarize, ensembled approaches utilized different DL net-
works for extracting the different modalities of information from the
datasets. In addition, multiple networks were also utilized for fusing
the extracting information to generate final scores for classification.
Different fusion strategies followed by classification module for gen-
erating the hierarchical robust features for determining the modalities
as real or fake. However, certain concerns should be addressed to
ensure the enhanced detection accuracy and robustness of the en-
sembled approaches. As this approach, integrates multiple DL models
for improving the detection results, maintaining model computational
complexity for real-time detection is a foremost concern. The number of
overheads in terms of hyperparameters must be controlled to deal with
the high computational requirements of the system. Reliable design
and proper training of the model are crucial to prevent overfitting
Information Fusion 118 (2025) 102993 
24 


--- PAGE 25 ---

A. Kumar et al.
Table 8 (continued).
17.
Raza and Malik
[49]
ResNet-1D for
audio features
and
multi-layered 3D
Resnet for video
features
Audio and video
Multimodaltrace
model
FakeAVCeleb,
PDD,
WLD DB
ACC, PR, RE,
F1-score
∙Combined channel extractors
and mixers for analyzing inter
and intra modalities.
∙DL-based multi-label
classification for deepfake
detection in audio–visuals.
∙DB augmentation by
incorporating other DB to
increase training size.
DB: Dataset, DL: Deep learning, POI: Person of interest, DFDC: Deepfake detection challenge, KoDF: Korean deepfake DB, LSTM: Long short-term memory, ACC: Accuracy, BCE:
Binary cross entropy, CM: Confusion matrix, AUC: Area under the curve, PR: Precision, RE: Recall, ViT: Vision transformer, MLP: Multi-layer perceptron.
and ensure model generalizability in practical situations. The decision-
making process must be transparent and trustworthy by ensuring model
interpretability and explainability for quick and fast detection of deep-
fakes. In addition, large and diverse multi-modal datasets must be
provided to evaluate the performance and identify its limitations in
deepfake detection.
7. Critical discussion
In this study, we have categorized deepfake detection algorithms as
single-modal and multi-modal approaches based on the input modal-
ities utilized in their model architecture. Single-modal architecture is
focused on processing individual multimedia content namely, audio,
video, or image only. Whereas multi-modal utilizes a combination
of these modalities to generate a unified outcome for classifying the
contents as fake or real. Deepfake detection comprises various steps
that include feature extraction, feature processing, unified feature gen-
eration, fusion strategies, and classification modules. All the techniques
under each category follow these steps but exploit single or multiple
feature extraction algorithms, classifiers, and fusion algorithms.
Generally, conventional studies focus on extracting the handcrafted
features and pre-trained DL models to reduce the computational com-
plexity of the model in feature extraction [88]. The fine-tuning of the
model is achieved by training the hyperparameters so that intrinsic
aspects of the forged data can be captured efficiently. However, model
efficiency is impacted when the performance is evaluated on unseen
and real-time collected data. It is essential to compute the model with
and without fine-tuning so that model effectiveness can be determined
in real-time. Hybrid models combine several DL models for feature
extraction and generate fused features for deepfake detection. The
detection accuracy is improved but the model complexity needs to be
addressed for faster processing of the content for deepfake detection.
Further, complex networks consisting of encoders, decoders along
with residual networks are adopted for feature extraction and process-
ing for deepfake detection. ViT, Swim transformer, and ST networks
have shown great potential and adaptability for deepfake classification
by extracting local and global features. In [65], authors have pre-
sented the ViT architecture along with CNN for detecting deepfakes
with enhanced accuracy. The model consisted of two steps namely,
feature learning and processing learned features into the sequence of
image pixels for final detection. The feature learning involves seventeen
convolutional layers, five max pooling, ReLU activation, and batch nor-
malization. On the other hand, the authors utilized a ViT transformer
with twelve transformer layers, 768 hidden layer components with
GeLU activation function, and balanced datasets. Zhu et al. [27] utilized
the ST network for extracting mutual information with temporal con-
trastive distillation. The model was trained on eight GPUs, consisting
of four stacked encoders each with eight attention heads. To add to
the model complexity, the classification head consisted of two fully
connected layers. The deepfake detection models are highly complex
and the processing performance with computational time is ignored in
most of the studies.
For training deepfake detection models, a lot of benchmark datasets
have been generated using DL techniques. The most popular and
adopted datasets by most of the recent studies are UADFV [124],
Deepfake-TIMIT [125], FaceForensics++ [126], DFDC (Deepfake detec-
tion 
challenge) 
[127], 
Celeb-DF 
v1, 
Celeb-DF 
v2 
[128],
DeeperForensics-1.0 [129], WildDeepfake [130] and many more [32,
131–133]. Apart from these visual datasets, there also exists bench-
mark datasets for predicting deepfake audio. Some latest audio deep-
fakes datasets are Asvspoof2019 [134], Arctic dataset [135], Css10
dataset [136] and VoxForge dataset [137]. Also, a multimodal dataset
exists which consists of an amalgamation of visual and audio record-
ings [138]. Most of these datasets are either generated synthetically or
noise is induced artificially to generate fake content. These datasets lack
diversity and capture limited expression for deepfake detections. The
authors introduced cross-dataset evaluation of the model to determine
its capabilities in a variety of scenarios so that the model will not fail
when implemented for real-time applications.
7.1. Benchmarking table
The proposed work is compared with existing studies in the area and
the same is depicted by a benchmarking table (Table 9). Ten crucial
and different attributes are identified and compared with eight other
existing studies. The last row of the table represents the proposed study.
The presence and absence of extracted unique and crucial attributes in
the study are recorded by marking ‘’ and ‘’ in the table, respectively.
It has been observed that only one study has followed the PRISMA
strategy for article selection and elaborated the statistical distribution
of the selected articles. Most of the studies discussed the deepfake
detection algorithms without categorizing them to highlight the salient
features. In addition, a limited number of studies were reviewed in
their work ignoring the multimodal approach for deepfake detection.
Most studies included feature extraction strategies for determining the
spatial, and temporal features from the global and local information.
The performance metrics for evaluating the model performance were
elaborated by few of the studies. The strength of the proposed study
is the categorization of deepfake detection algorithms as single-modal
and multi-modal techniques. Further, salient features along with the
advantages and disadvantages of each category for deepfake detection
models provide future insights and trends to the researchers working
in the domain. In addition, the adopted selection strategy, statistical
distribution analysis along with elaboration of performance metrics
further prove the robustness, efficiency, and potential of the proposed
study.
7.2. A short note on generalizability and explainability in deepfakes
In order to ensure the modal performance in real-time and unseen
situations, the generalizability of the model plays a crucial role. In
addition, various DL-modal such as CNN, XceptionNet, ResNet, and
many others with large numbers of convolutional layers, hidden layers,
and filters were utilized for detecting deepfakes [139]. The prediction
outcome of these complex models is opaque and uninterpretable. For
a better understanding and interpretability of the model, it is essential
to explore explainability in these models [140–143].
Information Fusion 118 (2025) 102993 
25 


--- PAGE 26 ---

A. Kumar et al.
Table 9
Benchmarking table for comparing the proposed work with existing studies.
SN
Citations
Yeara
PRISMAb
DFCc
FEd
CDFe
EDFf
MDFg
#SDFDh
PMAi
SAj
1.
Albahar and Almaki [56]
2019
×
×
×
×
×
×
15
×
×
2.
Seow et al. [2]
2022
×
✓
×
✓
×
✓
60
×
×
3.
Rana et al. [54]
2022
✓
✓
×
×
×
×
90
×
✓
4.
Malik et al. [57]
2022
×
×
✓
×
×
×
52
×
×
5.
Gupta et al. [58]
2023
×
×
✓
×
✓
×
67
×
×
6.
Mary and Edison [59]
2023
×
×
✓
×
×
×
20
✓
×
7.
Patel et al. [1]
2023
×
×
✓
×
✓
✓
68
×
×
8.
Passos et al. [55]
2024
×
✓
✓
×
×
×
101
✓
×
9.
Kumar et al. (the proposed)
2024
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
88
✓
✓
PRISMAb: Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis
DFCc: Deepfake categorization
FEd: Feature extraction
CDFe: Conventional deepfake
EDFf: Ensembled deepfake Fusion
MDFg: Multimodal deepfakes
#STDFh: Number of deepfake detection studies
PMAi: Performance metric analysis SAj: Statistical analysis.
In deepfake algorithms, cross-dataset evaluation is performed to
prove the model’s generalizability. The cross-datasets analysis also ad-
dresses the limitations of small and less diverse dataset. Cross-datasets
are challenging due to diverse, unseen, and realistic scenarios for
training and testing the model performance [66]. The cross-dataset
evaluation settings are also effective in exhibiting the model perfor-
mance for inter-class and intra-class instances which are distinguishable
for enhancing the model evaluation parameters for deepfake detection.
Next, explainability is one of the evolving technologies that provide
a clear interpretation of DL networks by analyzing model architec-
ture and parameters [144–147]. In deepfakes detection models, ex-
plainability provided model transparency by using decomposition and
data perturbations as post-hoc approaches [122]. Layer-wise relevance
propagation, Deep Taylor, and integrated gradients were utilized for
evaluating the model sensitivity, attribution, and input relevance. The
collected relevance score is approximated to obtain the heatmap predic-
tion for model explainability. Authors achieved model design explain-
ability by analyzing intra-modal and cross-modal consistency loss [29].
These losses can detect that portion of video which is inconsistent for
detecting the video as real or fake. The model explainability in perform-
ing decisions was achieved using Grad-CAM (Gradient class activation
mapping) [99]. Gradcam is an attentional mechanism that can high-
light certain regions in an image or video by generating heatmaps for
deepfake detection. Apart from Grad-CAM, other tools such as SOBOL,
XRAI (eXplanation with ranked area integrals), RISE (Random input
sampling explanations), and LIME (Local interpretable model agnostic
explanations) were also observed for evaluating model performance
for different perturbations [6]. These tools analyzed model’s internal
structure and worked based on the randomly selected input features.
To summarize, generalizability and explainability are two essential
and crucial features that must be present in the design and archi-
tecture of deepfake detection models. These features ensure trust,
transparency, robustness, and reliability in DL-based deepfake detec-
tion algorithms. An explainable model ensures a clear understanding
and interpretability of the model decision-making process. On the
other hand, generalizability ensures the model’s suitability in practical
scenarios. The presence of these two features in deepfakes detection
algorithms embarks the transfer of common knowledge across domains.
7.3. Discussion on evaluation metrics for performance analysis
To ensure enhanced performance to detect disinformation in real-
time, it is essential to utilize critical evaluation metrics to compute the
performance of single-modal and multi-modal detection algorithms on
public datasets. Exhaustive evaluation metrics such as accuracy, area
under the curve (AUC), precision, recall, F1-score, confusion matrix,
and error rate are exploited to determine model reliability and ro-
bustness to detect fake from real [39,64,99,123]. Most of the articles
utilized accuracy and AUC to measure the in-depth robustness and
reliability of the model to detect deepfakes correctly [28,30,81,118].
Accuracy computes the number of correctly detected instances with
respect to the total number of instances provided to the model. The
higher the accuracy better the model performance to detect fake from
the real. AUC is another popular, scalar, and robust metric to com-
pute the model’s functional performance. It considers all classification
thresholds to measure the receiver operating characteristics in the AUC
curve. Higher AUC values denote the better efficiency of the model to
detect deepfakes.
Apart from accuracy and AUC, other evaluation metrics are ex-
ploited to prove model effectiveness and robustness of the detection
model namely, specificity, sensitivity/recall, precision, f1-score, and
confusion matrix. Specificity computes the ratio number of true nega-
tives detected with respect to actual number of negative samples in the
dataset. Sensitivity determines the ratio of the number of true positives
detected with respect to the actual number of positives present in the
datasets. On the other hand, precision defined the ratio of number
of true positives detected by the algorithm to the total number of
samples predicted by the modal. F1-score computes the harmonic mean
of precision and recall for computing the detection performance of
the algorithms. The confusion matrix diagrammatically represents the
similarities between the misclassified classes of the samples which sup-
ports to analysis of the areas that need to be considered for improved
detection accuracy. These evaluation metrics are an indicator of model
performance for both single-modal and multi-modal deepfake detection
algorithms before the real-time deployment.
7.4. A short note on ethical implications and societal impact of deepfakes
detection
The realistic generation of deepfake content has raised ethical con-
cerns related to the privacy and security of the individual. The contents
can impersonate an individual, distrust, and impact its public rep-
utation. These contents have a negative societal impact which may
harm many industrial applications such as film production, political
campaigns, video games, and many others. Hence, it is crucial to design
robust, accurate, and efficient deepfake detection algorithms to prevent
the ill impacts of deepfakes from penetrating society.
There exists a wide range of real-time examples where deepfake
contents were created and circulated online to spread disinformation.
Politics is one of the key areas where deepfake contents are circu-
lated to discredit the image of politicians and leaders. One of the
most popular deepfake videos represented the conversation between
three American leaders Barak Obama, Donald Trump, and George W.
Bush [148]. These individuals appeared to be talking with each other
with accurate lip movements. However, no such conversation had
Information Fusion 118 (2025) 102993 
26 


--- PAGE 27 ---

A. Kumar et al.
happened among these three ever. Another potentially manipulated
deepfake video was circulated in which Barack Obama can be seen in-
sulting Donald Trump [148]. Recently, a prominent deepfake campaign
ad featuring the manipulated voice of Kamala Harris has escalated
debate over the misuse of the technology [149].
There is an exponential increase in crime against women using
deepfakes. Most of the pornographic content featuring females is gen-
erated using deepfakes [148]. These explicit videos unethically present
the renowned and famous celebrities without their consent. These
contents harass people sexually, mentally, and socially. Other notable
crimes that can be committed using deepfakes are writing blackmail
emails, sending phishing emails, and many other illegal activities. The
dominance of highly reliable, accurate, and efficient deepfake detection
algorithms is required to prohibit the bad effects of deepfakes on
society.
7.5. Recommendations and suggestions for future directions
Based on the selected deepfake detection studies under each cate-
gory, recommendations are being clustered to provide future insights
into the upcoming research. Despite of availability of highly trained
DL and transformer networks, the detection of highly realistic synthetic
multimedia content is a challenge. The recommendations are (a) Robust
system design (b) Diverse and real-time datasets (c) AI architectural
vision and (d) detection in low-quality videos. The discussion of these
recommendations is as follows (a) Robust system design: The system
performance is degraded when the short-term features are extracted
which are not suitable to maintain model performance on unseen
data [27]. Hence, there is a requirement for a system that can ex-
tract long-term robust and discriminative features from the considered
deepfake contents. The success rate can be improved by capturing
the fake pixels from the long-term temporal and contextual features.
(b) Diverse and real-time datasets: Most of the available benchmark
datasets consist of synthetic deepfake images for model training. The
size of these datasets is not sufficiently large and the number of fake
and real images with diversified facial expressions is also limited. Real-
time scenarios consisting of both audio and video are not captured
properly for tuning the model. (c) AI architectural vision: Various DL-
models are adopted for feature extraction and classification. These
models are highly complex with a sufficiently large number of con-
volutional layers, pooling layers, and complicated loss and activation
functions [65]. The training of these models requires large datasets
and high computational modeling. Hence, the model training and
processing should be analyzed to evaluate its capabilities for real-time
predictions. Also, the model architecture should be efficient enough
in terms of computations and processing. (d) Detection in low-quality
videos: To reduce the storage requirements, the video images are highly
compressed, and detection of deepfakes in such content is extremely
tedious [66]. The deepfake detection model should be trained in such
a way so that fake content can also be predicted in low-quality and
poor-resolution videos. Detecting deepfakes in well-generated realistic
synthetic content is a potential challenge in current scenarios.
Nowadays deepfakes creation is quite easy, quick, and inexpen-
sive [150]. Most of the deepfake creation tools are freely available,
and open source and do not require any technical expertise for their
operations and usage. The outcomes of these tools are quite fast and
very realistic which is very tedious for the existing detection algorithms
to identify. Most of the advanced deepfake detection tools have shown
superior results in deepfake identification but their performance is
limited in practical scenarios. There is a requirement for strong policies
and countermeasures to prevent the negative impact of deepfakes on
society. Datasets and detection tools must be standardized to design and
develop reliable detection algorithms. Generally, the negative impact of
deepfakes has prevailed through online platforms [20]. There is a need
to design strict, convincing, and robust governing policies to stop their
online propagation. The liability of social media and online platforms
in terms of their responsibility and obligations should be regulated to
prevent the dissemination of false information.
There is a requirement for strict and flexible rules to mitigate the
negative impacts of deepfakes on the community and society [58].
The detection algorithms must be equipped with the latest AI-based
technologies to identify forgery quickly and in real time. The deepfake
detection algorithms should be improved in terms of generalizability
and explainability. These features are critical to assess the detection
algorithm’s performance on cross-datasets and unseen contents. The
human intervention for detecting deepfakes is valuable to address
the practical detection challenges. Embedding ethical, societal, and
community aspects in deepfake detection is significantly important to
mitigate its adverse impacts on humans.
Further, the future requirements demand to protect the people from
the dangerous impact of deepfakes. For this, it is essential to transform
the deepfake algorithms into user-friendly applications and software.
This application will be platform friendly which can be integrated eas-
ily with social media platforms which can prevent users from deceiving
by false content. In addition, the software can be open source which can
also promote real-time detection of deepfakes.
8. Conclusion
In this study, we have extensively summarized the various deep-
fakes detection frameworks under two categories namely, single-modal
and multi-modal approaches. It has been analyzed that some contents
are manipulated using deepfake creation techniques for fun and comic
purposes. But generative AI advancements have created content for
negative purposes that include generating pornographic material from
popular celebs using face-swap, and augmenting audio of political
leaders are few generic examples. These contents are harmful to society
and nation, and hence, detection is essential to prevent the dangerous
influence. In this study, we have categorized the deepfake detection
frameworks based on the number of input features, methodology,
fusion strategy, and classification module. Conventional deepfake de-
tection algorithms are widely used due to low-level feature extraction
and simple classification modules. On the other hand, deep learning
and hybrid deepfake detection approaches utilize a lot of training
data for evaluating model performance. On the other hand, multi-
modal frameworks provide more realistic scenarios by using multiple
modalities in the feature extraction module and fusing them to generate
unified features for efficient deepfake classification. Models gener-
alizability is computed and tested using cross-dataset evaluation. In
addition, explainable models are also designed for better interpretable
outcomes.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Ashish Kumar: Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investiga-
tion, Conceptualization. Divya Singh: Writing – review & editing,.
Rachna Jain: Writing – review & editing. Deepak Kumar Jain: Writ-
ing – review & editing, Validation, Supervision. Chenquan Gan: Writ-
ing – review & editing, Supervision. Xudong Zhao: Writing – review &
editing.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
Information Fusion 118 (2025) 102993 
27 


--- PAGE 28 ---

A. Kumar et al.
References
[1] Y. Patel, S. Tanwar, R. Gupta, P. Bhattacharya, I.E. Davidson, R. Nyameko,
S. Aluvala, V. Vimal, Deepfake generation and detection: Case study and
challenges, IEEE Access 11 (2023) 143296–143323, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
ACCESS.2023.3342107.
[2] J.W. Seow, M.K. Lim, R.C. Phan, J.K. Liu, A comprehensive overview of
deepfake: Generation, detection, datasets, and opportunities, Neurocomputing
513 (2022) 351–371.
[3] K. Somoray, D.J. Miller, Providing detection strategies to improve human
detection of deepfakes: An experimental study, Comput. Hum. Behav. 149
(2023) 107917.
[4] T.T. Nguyen, Q.V.H. Nguyen, D.T. Nguyen, D.T. Nguyen, T. Huynh-The, S.
Nahavandi, C.M. Nguyen, Deep learning for deepfakes creation and detection:
A survey, Comput. Vis. Image Underst. 223 (2022) 103525.
[5] H.R. Hasan, K. Salah, R. Jayaraman, I. Yaqoob, M. Omar, NFTs for combating
deepfakes and fake metaverse digital contents, Internet Things 25 (2024)
101133.
[6] B. Gowrisankar, V.L. Thing, An adversarial attack approach for explainable AI
evaluation on deepfake detection models, Comput. Secur. 139 (2024) 103684.
[7] M. Mcuba, A. Singh, R.A. Ikuesan, H. Venter, The effect of deep learning
methods on deepfake audio detection for digital investigation, Procedia Comput.
Sci. 219 (2023) 211–219.
[8] P.M.G.I. Reis, R.O. Ribeiro, A forensic evaluation method for DeepFake detec-
tion using DCNN-based facial similarity scores, Forensic Sci. Int. 358 (2024)
111747.
[9] V.V.V.N.S. Vamsi, S.S. Shet, S.S.M. Reddy, S.S. Rose, S.R. Shetty, S. Sathvika,
S.P. Shankar, Deepfake detection in digital media forensics, Glob. Transitions
Proc. 3 (1) (2022) 74–79.
[10] Z. Xia, T. Qiao, M. Xu, N. Zheng, S. Xie, Towards deepfake video forensics
based on facial textural disparities in multi-color channels, Inform. Sci. 607
(2022) 654–669.
[11] A. Kumar, Visual Object Tracking Using Deep Learning, CRC Press, 2023.
[12] A. Kumar, P. Sarren, Raja, Deep learning-based multi-object tracking, in: Object
Tracking Technology: Trends, Challenges and Applications, Springer, 2023, pp.
183–199.
[13] A. Kumar, R. Vohra, R. Jain, M. Li, C. Gan, D.K. Jain, Correlation filter based
single object tracking: A review, Inf. Fusion (2024) 102562.
[14] A. Kumar, G.S. Walia, K. Sharma, A novel approach for multi-cue feature fusion
for robust object tracking, Appl. Intell. 50 (10) (2020) 3201–3218.
[15] A. Kumar, G.S. Walia, K. Sharma, Robust object tracking based on adaptive
multicue feature fusion, J. Electron. Imaging 29 (6) (2020) 063001–063001.
[16] A. Kumar, V. Aelgani, R. Vohra, S.K. Gupta, M. Bhagawati, S. Paul, J.R. Laird,
Artificial intelligence bias in medical system designs: A systematic review,
Multimedia Tools Appl. 83 (6) (2024) 18005–18057.
[17] A. Kumar, R. Jain, Behavioral prediction of cancer using machine learning, in:
Cancer Prediction for Industrial IoT 4.0, Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2021, pp.
91–105.
[18] A. Kumar, R. Jain, M. Gupta, S.M. Islam, 6G-Enabled IoT and AI for Smart
Healthcare: Challenges, Impact, and Analysis, CRC Press, 2023.
[19] A. Kumar, P. Sareen, A. Arora, Healthcare engineering using AI and dis-
tributed technologies, in: Smart Distributed Embedded Systems for Healthcare
Applications, CRC Press, 2023, pp. 1–14.
[20] F. Abbas, A. Taeihagh, Unmasking deepfakes: A systematic review of deepfake
detection and generation techniques using artificial intelligence, Expert Syst.
Appl. (2024) 124260.
[21] A. Mitra, S.P. Mohanty, P. Corcoran, E. Kougianos, A novel machine learning
based method for deepfake video detection in social media, in: 2020 IEEE
International Symposium on Smart Electronic Systems (ISES) (Formerly INiS),
2020, pp. 91–96, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/iSES50453.2020.00031.
[22] A. Mitra, S.P. Mohanty, P. Corcoran, E. Kougianos, A machine learning based
approach for deepfake detection in social media through key video frame
extraction, SN Comput. Sci. 2 (2) (2021) 98.
[23] M.S. Rana, B. Murali, A.H. Sung, Deepfake detection using machine learn-
ing algorithms, in: 2021 10th International Congress on Advanced Applied
Informatics, IIAI-AAI, IEEE, 2021, pp. 458–463.
[24] A. Qadir, R. Mahum, M.A. El-Meligy, A.E. Ragab, A. AlSalman, M. Awais, An
efficient deepfake video detection using robust deep learning, Heliyon 10 (5)
(2024).
[25] P. Sadhana, N. Ravishankar, A. Ashok, R. Ravichandran, R. Paul, K. Murali,
Enhancing fake image detection: A novel two-step approach combining GANs
and CNNs, Procedia Comput. Sci. 235 (2024) 810–819.
[26] S. Suganthi, M.U.A. Ayoobkhan, N. Bacanin, K. Venkatachalam, H. Štěpán, T.
Pavel, Deep learning model for deep fake face recognition and detection, PeerJ
Comput. Sci. 8 (2022).
[27] Y. Zhu, C. Zhang, J. Gao, X. Sun, Z. Rui, X. Zhou, High-compressed deepfake
video detection with contrastive spatiotemporal distillation, Neurocomputing
565 (2024) 126872.
[28] A. Hamza, A.R.R. Javed, F. Iqbal, N. Kryvinska, A.S. Almadhor, Z. Jalil, R.
Borghol, Deepfake audio detection via MFCC features using machine learning,
IEEE Access 10 (2022) 134018–134028.
[29] M. Tian, M. Khayatkhoei, J. Mathai, W. AbdAlmageed, Unsupervised multi-
modal deepfake detection using intra-and cross-modal inconsistencies, 2024,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.17088.
[30] F. Iqbal, A. Abbasi, A.R. Javed, Z. Jalil, J.N. Al-Karaki, Deepfake audio detection
via feature engineering and machine learning, in: CIKM Workshops, 2022, pp.
1–12.
[31] G. Wang, Q. Jiang, X. Jin, X. Cui, FFR_FD: Effective and fast detection of
DeepFakes via feature point defects, Inform. Sci. 596 (2022) 472–488.
[32] X. Yang, Y. Li, S. Lyu, Exposing deep fakes using inconsistent head poses,
in: ICASSP 2019-2019 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
Signal Processing, ICASSP, IEEE, 2019, pp. 8261–8265.
[33] H. Farid, Creating, using, misusing, and detecting deep fakes, J. Online Trust.
Saf. 1 (4) (2022).
[34] F. Khalid, A. Javed, H. Ilyas, A. Irtaza, DFGNN: An interpretable and generalized
graph neural network for deepfakes detection, Expert Syst. Appl. 222 (2023)
119843.
[35] X. Nguyen, T. Tran, K. Nguyen, D.-T. Truong, Learning spatio-temporal features
to detect manipulated facial videos created by the deepfake techniques, Forensic
Sci. Int.: Digit. Investig. 36 (2021) 301108.
[36] W. Pu, J. Hu, X. Wang, Y. Li, S. Hu, B. Zhu, S. Lyu, Learning a deep dual-level
network for robust DeepFake detection, Pattern Recognit. 130 (2022) 108832.
[37] S. Dincer, G. Ulutas, B. Ustubioglu, G. Tahaoglu, N. Sklavos, Golden ratio based
deep fake video detection system with fusion of capsule networks, Comput.
Electr. Eng. 117 (2024) 109234.
[38] E. Essa, Feature fusion vision transformers using MLP-mixer for enhanced
deepfake detection, Neurocomputing 598 (2024) 128128.
[39] S. Ganguly, A. Ganguly, S. Mohiuddin, S. Malakar, R. Sarkar, ViXNet: Vision
transformer with xception network for deepfakes based video and image forgery
detection, Expert Syst. Appl. 210 (2022) 118423.
[40] D. Coccomini, R. Caldelli, F. Falchi, C. Gennaro, On the generalization of deep
learning models in video deepfake detection, J. Imaging 9 (5) (2023) 89.
[41] X. Liu, Y. Yu, X. Li, Y. Zhao, Mcl: multimodal contrastive learning for deepfake
detection, IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol. (2024).
[42] J. Gao, M. Micheletto, G. Orrù, S. Concas, X. Feng, G. Marcialis, F. Roli, Texture
and artifact decomposition for improving generalization in deep-learning-based
deepfake detection, Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 133 (2024) 108450.
[43] S. Kingra, N. Aggarwal, N. Kaur, LBPNet: Exploiting texture descriptor for
deepfake detection, Forensic Sci. Int.: Digit. Investig. 42 (2022) 301452.
[44] G. Leporoni, L. Maiano, L. Papa, I. Amerini, A guided-based approach for
deepfake detection: RGB-depth integration via features fusion, Pattern Recognit.
Lett. 181 (2024) 99–105.
[45] A. Elhassan, M. Al-Fawa’reh, M. Jafar, M. Ababneh, S. Jafar, DFT-MF: Enhanced
deepfake detection using mouth movement and transfer learning, SoftwareX 19
(2022) 101115.
[46] R. Saravana Ram, M. Vinoth Kumar, T. Al-shami, M. Masud, H. Aljuaid, M.
Abouhawwash, Deep fake detection using computer vision-based deep neural
network with pairwise learning, Intell. Autom. Soft Comput. 35 (2) (2023).
[47] X. Xu, S. Tang, M. Zhu, P. He, S. Li, Y. Cao, A novel model compression
method based on joint distillation for deepfake video detection, J. King Saud
Univ. Comput. Inf. Sci. 35 (9) (2023) 101792.
[48] Z. Xu, J. Liu, W. Lu, B. Xu, X. Zhao, B. Li, J. Huang, Detecting facial ma-
nipulated videos based on set convolutional neural networks, J. Vis. Commun.
Image Represent. 77 (2021) 103119.
[49] M.A. Raza, K.M. Malik, Multimodaltrace: Deepfake detection using audiovi-
sual representation learning, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023, pp. 993–1000.
[50] J. Yoon, A. Panizo-LLedot, D. Camacho, C. Choi, Triple-modality interaction for
deepfake detection on zero-shot identity, Inf. Fusion 109 (2024) 102424.
[51] S. Muppalla, S. Jia, S. Lyu, Integrating audio-visual features for multimodal
deepfake detection, in: 2023 IEEE MIT Undergraduate Research Technology
Conference, URTC, IEEE, 2023, pp. 1–5.
[52] D. Salvi, H. Liu, S. Mandelli, P. Bestagini, W. Zhou, W. Zhang, S. Tubaro, A
robust approach to multimodal deepfake detection, J. Imaging 9 (6) (2023)
122.
[53] Z. Yan, P. Sun, Y. Lang, S. Du, S. Zhang, W. Wang, L. Liu, Multimodal graph
learning for deepfake detection, 2022, arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.05419.
[54] M. Rana, M. Nobi, B. Murali, A. Sung, Deepfake detection: A systematic
literature review, IEEE Access 10 (2022) 25494–25513.
[55] L. Passos, D. Jodas, K. Costa, L. Souza Júnior, D. Rodrigues, J. Del Ser, J. Papa,
A review of deep learning-based approaches for deepfake content detection,
Expert Syst. 41 (8) (2024) e13570.
[56] M. Albahar, J. Almalki, Deepfakes: Threats and countermeasures systematic
review, J. Theor. Appl. Inf. Technol. 97 (22) (2019) 3242–3250.
[57] A. Malik, M. Kuribayashi, S.M. Abdullahi, A.N. Khan, DeepFake detection for
human face images and videos: A survey, IEEE Access 10 (2022) 18757–18775.
[58] G. Gupta, K. Raja, M. Gupta, T. Jan, S.T. Whiteside, M. Prasad, A comprehensive
review of DeepFake detection using advanced machine learning and fusion
methods, Electronics 13 (1) (2023) 95.
Information Fusion 118 (2025) 102993 
28 


--- PAGE 29 ---

A. Kumar et al.
[59] A. Mary, A. Edison, Deep fake detection using deep learning techniques: A
literature review, in: 2023 International Conference on Control, Communication
and Computing, ICCC, IEEE, 2023, pp. 1–6.
[60] R. Tolosana, S. Romero-Tapiador, R. Vera-Rodriguez, E. Gonzalez-Sosa, J.
Fierrez, DeepFakes detection across generations: Analysis of facial regions,
fusion, and performance evaluation, Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 110 (2022) 104673.
[61] B. Yan, C.-T. Li, X. Lu, JRC: Deepfake detection via joint reconstruction and
classification, Neurocomputing (2024) 127862.
[62] A. Ismail, M. Elpeltagy, M. S. Zaki, K. Eldahshan, A new deep learning-based
methodology for video deepfake detection using XGBoost, Sensors 21 (16)
(2021) 5413.
[63] A. Raza, K. Munir, M. Almutairi, A novel deep learning approach for deepfake
image detection, Appl. Sci. 12 (19) (2022) 9820.
[64] A. Kharel, M. Paranjape, A. Bera, DF-TransFusion: Multimodal deepfake detec-
tion via lip-audio cross-attention and facial self-attention, 2023, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.06511.
[65] D. Wodajo, S. Atnafu, Deepfake video detection using convolutional vision
transformer, 2021, arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.11126.
[66] M.A. Amin, Y. Hu, C.-T. Li, B. Liu, Deepfake detection based on cross-domain
local characteristic analysis with multi-domain transformer, Alex. Eng. J. 91
(2024) 592–609.
[67] J. Khochare, C. Joshi, B. Yenarkar, S. Suratkar, F. Kazi, A deep learning
framework for audio deepfake detection, Arab. J. Sci. Eng. (2021) 1–12.
[68] G. Naskar, S. Mohiuddin, S. Malakar, E. Cuevas, R. Sarkar, Deepfake detection
using deep feature stacking and meta-learning, Heliyon 10 (4) (2024).
[69] D.S. AbdElminaam, N. Sherif, Z. Ayman, M. Mohamed, M. Hazem, DeepFakeDG:
A deep learning approach for deep fake detection and generation, J. Comput.
Commun. 2 (2) (2023) 31–37.
[70] S.T. Ikram, S. Chambial, D. Sood, et al., A performance enhancement of
deepfake video detection through the use of a hybrid CNN deep learning model,
Int. J. Electr. Comput. Eng. Syst. 14 (2) (2023) 169–178.
[71] L. Guarnera, O. Giudice, S. Battiato, Deepfake detection by analyzing convolu-
tional traces, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition Workshops, 2020, pp. 666–667.
[72] M. Kim, S. Tariq, S.S. Woo, Fretal: Generalizing deepfake detection using
knowledge distillation and representation learning, in: Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2021, pp.
1001–1012.
[73] A.A. Maksutov, V.O. Morozov, A.A. Lavrenov, A.S. Smirnov, Methods of
deepfake detection based on machine learning, in: 2020 IEEE Conference of
Russian Young Researchers in Electrical and Electronic Engineering, EIConRus,
IEEE, 2020, pp. 408–411.
[74] H. Zou, M. Shen, Y. Hu, C. Chen, E.S. Chng, D. Rajan, Cross-modality and
within-modality regularization for audio-visual deepfake detection, in: ICASSP
2024-2024 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing, ICASSP, IEEE, 2024, pp. 4900–4904.
[75] O. De Lima, S. Franklin, S. Basu, B. Karwoski, A. George, Deepfake detection
using spatiotemporal convolutional networks, 2020, arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.
14749.
[76] R. Liu, J. Zhang, G. Gao, Multi-space channel representation learning for mono-
to-binaural conversion based audio deepfake detection, Inf. Fusion 105 (2024)
102257.
[77] Y. Nirkin, L. Wolf, Y. Keller, T. Hassner, Deepfake detection based on discrep-
ancies between faces and their context, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.
44 (10) (2021) 6111–6121.
[78] B. Wang, X. Wu, F. Wang, Y. Zhang, F. Wei, Z. Song, Spatial-frequency feature
fusion based deepfake detection through knowledge distillation, Eng. Appl.
Artif. Intell. 133 (2024) 108341.
[79] L.-Y. Hsu, AI-assisted deepfake detection using adaptive blind image
watermarking, J. Vis. Commun. Image Represent. 100 (2024) 104094.
[80] K. Jayashre, M. Amsaprabhaa, Safeguarding media integrity: A hybrid optimized
deep feature fusion based deepfake detection in videos, Comput. Secur. 142
(2024) 103860.
[81] G. Lee, M. Kim, Deepfake detection using the rate of change between frames
based on computer vision, Sensors 21 (21) (2021) 7367.
[82] J.K. Lewis, I.E. Toubal, H. Chen, V. Sandesera, M. Lomnitz, Z. Hampel-Arias,
C. Prasad, K. Palaniappan, Deepfake video detection based on spatial, spectral,
and temporal inconsistencies using multimodal deep learning, in: 2020 IEEE
Applied Imagery Pattern Recognition Workshop, AIPR, IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–9.
[83] H. Ilyas, A. Javed, K. Malik, AvFakeNet: A unified end-to-end dense swin
transformer deep learning model for audio–visual deepfakes detection, Appl.
Soft Comput. 136 (2023) 110124.
[84] C. Zhu, B. Zhang, Q. Yin, C. Yin, W. Lu, Deepfake detection via inter-frame
inconsistency recomposition and enhancement, Pattern Recognit. 147 (2024)
110077.
[85] Y. Ni, W. Zeng, P. Xia, G. Yang, R. Tan, A deepfake detection algorithm based
on Fourier transform of biological signal, Comput. Mater. Contin. 79 (3) (2024).
[86] M.S. Rana, A.H. Sung, Deepfakestack: A deep ensemble-based learning tech-
nique for deepfake detection, in: 2020 7th IEEE International Conference on
Cyber Security and Cloud Computing (CSCloud)/2020 6th IEEE International
Conference on Edge Computing and Scalable Cloud, EdgeCom, IEEE, 2020, pp.
70–75.
[87] N. Yu, L. Chen, T. Leng, Z. Chen, X. Yi, An explainable deepfake of speech
detection method with spectrograms and waveforms, J. Inf. Secur. Appl. 81
(2024) 103720.
[88] M. Arshed, S. Mumtaz, M. Ibrahim, C. Dewi, M. Tanveer, S. Ahmed, Multiclass
AI-generated deepfake face detection using patch-wise deep learning model,
Computers 13 (1) (2024) 31.
[89] Z. Guo, G. Yang, J. Chen, X. Sun, Fake face detection via adaptive manipulation
traces extraction network, Comput. Vis. Image Underst. 204 (2021) 103170.
[90] F. Nie, J. Ni, J. Zhang, B. Zhang, W. Zhang, FRADE: Forgery-aware audio-
distilled multimodal learning for deepfake detection, in: ACM Multimedia 2024,
2024, pp. 1–10.
[91] L. Zhang, D. Zhao, C. Lim, H. Asadi, H. Huang, Y. Yu, R. Gao, Video deep-
fake classification using particle swarm optimization-based evolving ensemble
models, Knowl.-Based Syst. 289 (2024) 111461.
[92] D. Ballesteros, Y. Rodriguez-Ortega, D. Renza, G. Arce, Deep4SNet: deep
learning for fake speech classification, Expert Syst. Appl. 184 (2021) 115465.
[93] M. Lomnitz, Z. Hampel-Arias, V. Sandesara, S. Hu, Multimodal approach
for deepfake detection, in: 2020 IEEE Applied Imagery Pattern Recognition
Workshop, AIPR, IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–9.
[94] S. Solaiyappan, Y. Wen, Machine learning based medical image deepfake
detection: A comparative study, Mach. Learn. Appl. 8 (2022) 100298.
[95] J. Awotunde, R. Jimoh, A. Imoize, A. Abdulrazaq, C.-T. Li, C.-C. Lee, An
enhanced deep learning-based deepfake video detection and classification
system, Electronics 12 (1) (2022) 87.
[96] A. Badale, L. Castelino, C. Darekar, J. Gomes, Deep fake detection using neural
networks, in: 15th IEEE International Conference on Advanced Video and Signal
Based Surveillance, AVSS, 2018, pp. 1–6.
[97] M. Raza, K. Malik, I. Haq, Holisticdfd: Infusing spatiotemporal transformer
embeddings for deepfake detection, Inform. Sci. 645 (2023) 119352.
[98] P. Sharma, M. Kumar, H. Sharma, GAN-CNN ensemble: A robust deepfake
detection model of social media images using minimized catastrophic forgetting
and generative replay technique, Procedia Comput. Sci. 235 (2024) 948–960.
[99] I. Haq, K. Malik, K. Muhammad, Multimodal neurosymbolic approach for
explainable deepfake detection, ACM Trans. Multimed. Comput. Commun. Appl.
(2023).
[100] R. Rafique, M. Nawaz, H. Kibriya, M. Masood, Deepfake detection using error
level analysis and deep learning, in: 2021 4th International Conference on
Computing & Information Sciences, ICCIS, IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–4.
[101] C. Ledig, L. Theis, F. Huszár, J. Caballero, A. Cunningham, A. Acosta, Z. Wang,
Photo-realistic single image super-resolution using a generative adversarial
network, Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (2017).
[102] Z. He, W. Zuo, M. Kan, S. Shan, X. Chen, Attgan: Facial attribute editing by
only changing what you want, IEEE Trans. Image Process. 28 (11) (2019)
5464–5478.
[103] T. Karras, S. Laine, T. Aila, A style-based generator architecture for generative
adversarial networks, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2019.
[104] P.K. R., R. Mukhopadhyay, A. Jha, V. Namboodiri, C. Jawahar, Towards au-
tomatic face-to-face translation, in: Proceedings of the 27th ACM International
Conference on Multimedia, 2019.
[105] R. Natsume, T. Yatagawa, S. Morishima, Rsgan: face swapping and editing
using face and hair representation in latent spaces, 2018, arXiv preprint arXiv:
1804.03447.
[106] Z. Khanjani, G. Watson, V. Janeja, How deep are the fakes? focusing on audio
deepfake: A survey, 2021, arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.14203.
[107] A. Khodabakhsh, C. Busch, R. Ramachandra, A taxonomy of audiovisual
fake multimedia content creation technology, in: 2018 IEEE Conference on
Multimedia Information Processing and Retrieval, MIPR, IEEE, 2018.
[108] S. Salman, J. Shamsi, R. Qureshi, Deep fake generation and detection: Issues,
challenges, and solutions, IT Prof. 25 (1) (2023) 52–59.
[109] K. Liu, I. Perov, D. Gao, N. Chervoniy, W. Zhou, W. Zhang, Deepfacelab:
Integrated, flexible and extensible face-swapping framework, Pattern Recognit.
141 (2023) 109628.
[110] Y. Wang, L. Song, W. Wu, C. Qian, R. He, C. Loy, Talking faces: Audio-to-video
face generation, in: Handbook of digital face manipulation and detection: From
deepfakes to morphing attacks, Springer International Publishing Cham, 2022,
pp. 163–188.
[111] J. Thies, M. Zollhofer, M. Stamminger, C. Theobalt, M. Nießner, Face2face:
Real-time face capture and reenactment of rgb videos, in: Proceedings of
the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2016, pp.
2387–2395.
[112] J. Zhang, X. Zeng, M. Wang, Y. Pan, Y. Liu, Y. Liu, C. Fan, Freenet: Multi-
identity face reenactment, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2020.
Information Fusion 118 (2025) 102993 
29 


--- PAGE 30 ---

A. Kumar et al.
[113] S. Kolagati, T. Priyadharshini, V. Rajam, Exposing deepfakes using a deep
multilayer perceptron–convolutional neural network model, Int. J. Inf. Manag.
Data Insights 2 (1) (2022) 100054.
[114] H. Lin, W. Huang, W. Luo, W. Lu, DeepFake detection with multi-scale
convolution and vision transformer, Digit. Signal Process. 134 (2023) 103895.
[115] Z. Cai, M. Li, Integrating frame-level boundary detection and deepfake detection
for locating manipulated regions in partially spoofed audio forgery attacks,
Comput. Speech Lang. 85 (2024) 101597.
[116] C.-J. Chew, Y.-C. Lin, Y.-C. Chen, Y.-Y. Fan, J.-S. Lee, Preserving manipulated
and synthetic deepfake detection through face texture naturalness, J. Inf. Secur.
Appl. 83 (2024) 103798.
[117] J. Ke, L. Wang, DF-UDetector: An effective method towards robust deepfake
detection via feature restoration, Neural Netw. 160 (2023) 216–226.
[118] W. Yang, X. Zhou, Z. Chen, B. Guo, Z. Ba, Z. Xia, K. Ren, Avoid-df: Audio-visual
joint learning for detecting deepfake, IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 18 (2023)
2015–2029.
[119] H. Khalid, M. Kim, S. Tariq, S.S. Woo, Evaluation of an audio-video multimodal
deepfake dataset using unimodal and multimodal detectors, in: Proceedings of
the 1st Workshop on Synthetic Multimedia-Audiovisual Deepfake Generation
and Detection, 2021, pp. 7–15.
[120] T. Mittal, U. Bhattacharya, R. Chandra, A. Bera, D. Manocha, Emotions don’t lie:
An audio-visual deepfake detection method using affective cues, in: Proceedings
of the 28th ACM International Conference on Multimedia, 2020, pp. 2823–2832.
[121] J. Yang, S. Xiao, A. Li, G. Lan, H. Wang, Detecting fake images by identifying
potential texture difference, Future Gener. Comput. Syst. 125 (2021) 127–135.
[122] S.-Y. Lim, D.-K. Chae, S.-C. Lee, Detecting deepfake voice using explainable
deep learning techniques, Appl. Sci. 12 (8) (2022) 3926.
[123] D. Cozzolino, A. Pianese, M. Nießner, L. Verdoliva, Audio-visual person-of-
interest deepfake detection, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023, pp. 943–952.
[124] C. Liy, L. InIctuOculi, Exposing AI-created fake videos by detecting eye blinking,
in: 2018 IEEE International Workshop on Information Forensics and Security,
WIFS, IEEE, 2018.
[125] P. Korshunov, S. Marcel, D. Fakes, A New Threat to Face Recognition?
Assessment and Detection, Cornell University, New York, NY, USA, 2018, pp.
1–5.
[126] A. Rossler, D. Cozzolino, L. Verdoliva, C. Riess, J. Thies, M. Nießner, Face-
forensics++: Learning to detect manipulated facial images, Proc. IEEE/ CVF
Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (2019).
[127] B. Dolhansky, The deepfake detection challenge (DFDC) pre view dataset, 2019,
arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.08854.
[128] Y. Li, X. Yang, P. Sun, H. Qi, S. Lyu, Celeb-DF: A large-scale challenging
dataset for deepfake forensics, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2020.
[129] L. Jiang, R. Li, W. Wu, C. Qian, C. Loy, Deeperforensics-1.0: A large-scale
dataset for real-world face forgery detection, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2020.
[130] B. Zi, M. Chang, J. Chen, X. Ma, Y.-G. Jiang, Wilddeepfake: A challenging
real-world dataset for deepfake detection, in: Proceedings of the 28th ACM
international conference on multimedia, 2020.
[131] H. Dang, F. Liu, J. Stehouwer, X. Liu, A. Jain, On the detection of digital face
manipulation, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, 2020.
[132] T.-N. Le, H.H. Nguyen, J. Yamagishi, I. Echizen, Openforensics: Large-scale
challenging dataset for multi-face forgery detection and segmentation in-the-
wild, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
Vision, 2021, pp. 10117–10127.
[133] A. Rössler, D. Cozzolino, L. Verdoliva, C. Riess, J. Thies, M. Nießner, Faceforen-
sics: A large-scale video dataset for forgery detection in human faces, 2018,
arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.09179.
[134] J. Yamagishi, M. Todisco, M. Sahidullah, H. Delgado, X. Wang, N. Evans, T.
Kinnunen, K.A. Lee, V. Vestman, A. Nautsch, Asvspoof 2019: The 3rd automatic
speaker verification spoofing and countermeasures challenge database, 2019.
[135] J. Kominek, A. Black, The CMU arctic speech databases, in: Fifth ISCA
Workshop on Speech Synthesis, 2004, pp. 1–2.
[136] K. Park, T. Mulc, CSS10: A collection of single speaker speech datasets for 10
languages, 2019, arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.11269.
[137] K. MacLean, Voxforge, 2018, http://www.voxforge.org/home, (Accessed on
2012).
[138] Z. Cai, S. Ghosh, A. Dhall, T. Gedeon, K. Stefanov, M. Hayat, Glitch in
the matrix: A large scale benchmark for content driven audio–visual forgery
detection and localization, Comput. Vis. Image Underst. 236 (2023) 103818.
[139] M. Taeb, H. Chi, Comparison of deepfake detection techniques through deep
learning, J. Cybersecur. Priv. 2 (1) (2022) 89–106.
[140] M. Albahar, J. Almalki, Deepfakes: Threats and countermeasures systematic
review, J. Theor. Appl. Inf. Technol. 97 (22) (2019) 3242–3250.
[141] A. Kumar, R. Mamgai, R. Jain, Application of IoT-enabled CNN for natural lan-
guage processing, in: IoT-Enabled Convolutional Neural Networks: Techniques
and Applications, River Publishers, 2023, pp. 149–177.
[142] A. Kumar, A. Mangotra, A. Ailawadi, R. Jain, M. Arora, Sentiment analysis on
multilingual data: Hinglish, in: International Conference on Data Analytics &
Management, Springer, 2023, pp. 607–620.
[143] L. Mohanty, A. Kumar, V. Mehta, M. Agarwal, J. Suri, Pruning techniques for
artificial intelligence networks: a deeper look at their engineering design and
bias: the first review of its kind, Multimedia Tools Appl. (2024) 1–75.
[144] S. Dong, J. Wang, J. Liang, H. Fan, R. Ji, Explaining deepfake detection
by analysing image matching, in: European Conference on Computer Vision,
Springer, 2022, pp. 18–35.
[145] Z. Lin, M. Shafiee, S. Bochkarev, M. Jules, X. Wang, A. Wong, Do explanations
reflect decisions? A machine-centric strategy to quantify the performance of
explainability algorithms, 2019, arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.07387.
[146] W. Samek, G. Montavon, A. Binder, S. Lapuschkin, K.-R. Müller, Interpreting the
predictions of complex ml models by layer-wise relevance propagation, 2016,
arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.08191.
[147] C. Zhao, C. Wang, G. Hu, H. Chen, C. Liu, J. Tang, ISTVT: interpretable spatial-
temporal video transformer for deepfake detection, IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
Secur. 18 (2023) 1335–1348.
[148] A. Smith, Deepfakes are the most dangerous crime of the future, researchers
say, Indep. 5 (2020).
[149] K. Tenbarge, Elon musk made a kamala harris deepfake ad go viral, sparking a
debate about parody and free speech, NBCNews (2024) (Retrieved 12 October
2024).
[150] A. Kaur, A. Noori Hoshyar, V. Saikrishna, S. Firmin, F. Xia, Deepfake video
detection: challenges and opportunities, Artif. Intell. Rev. 57 (6) (2024) 1–47.
Information Fusion 118 (2025) 102993 
30 
