

--- PAGE 1 ---

Computer Vision and Image Understanding 257 (2025) 104375
 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Computer Vision and Image Understanding
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cviu
 
Convolutional neural network framework for deepfake detection: A 
diffusion-based approach
Emmanuel Pintelas a,∗, Ioannis E. Livieris b
a Department of Mathematics, University of Patras, GR 265-00, Greece
b Department of Statistics and Insurance, University of Pireaus, GR 185-34, Greece
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Communicated by Arjan Kuijper
Keywords:
Computer Vision
Deep Learning
Convolutional neural networks
Image classification
Deepfake detection
 
A B S T R A C T
In the rapidly advancing domain of synthetic media, DeepFakes emerged as a potent tool for misinformation 
and manipulation. Nevertheless, the engineering challenge lies in detecting such content to ensure information 
integrity. Recent artificial intelligence contributions in deepfake detection have mainly concentrated around 
sophisticated convolutional neural network models, which derive insights from facial biometrics, including 
multi-attentional and multi-view mechanisms, pairwise/siamese, distillation learning technique and facial-
geometry approaches. In this work, we consider a new diffusion-based neural network approach, rather than 
directly analyzing deepfake images for inconsistencies. Motivated by the considerable property of diffusion 
procedure of unveiling anomalies, we employ diffusion of the inherent structure of deepfake images, seeking 
for patterns throughout this process. Specifically, the proposed diffusion network, iteratively adds noise to 
the input image until it almost becomes pure noise. Subsequently, a convolutional neural network extracts 
features from the final diffused state, as well as from all transient states of the diffusion process. The 
comprehensive experimental analysis demonstrates the efficacy and adaptability of the proposed model, 
validating its robustness against a wide range of deepfake detection models, being a promising artificial 
intelligence tool for DeepFake detection.
1. Introduction
DeepFake technology, which involves the creation of synthetic me-
dia such as images, videos, and audio, is rapidly evolving primarily 
through the use of deep learning models such as Generative Adversarial 
Networks (GAN) (Pan et al., 2019). These models can almost seamlessly 
substitute the facial characteristics of a person in the original content 
with someone else’s likeness, making it exceptionally challenging even 
for human experts to discern their authenticity (Nightingale et al., 
2017; Rossler et al., 2019). This rapid advancement has raised concerns 
due to the technology’s potential misuse, especially when is used as 
a tool for misinformation, manipulation, and harassment; therefore, 
posing threats to human rights (Agarwal et al., 2019; Pintelas and 
Pintelas, 2022).
This potential threat has led to increased interest in the field of 
DeepFake detection (Qian et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2021; Liang et al., 
2023; Hsu et al., 2020). However, detecting these manipulated pieces 
of media is not straightforward. It is a complex classification problem, 
which challenges both machines and humans (Li et al., 2020; Rossler 
et al., 2019). While significant efforts (Tolosana et al., 2022; Pintelas 
et al., 2023; Dolhansky et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2021; Bonettini et al., 
∗Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: e.pintelas@upatras.gr (E. Pintelas), livieris@unipi.gr (I.E. Livieris).
2021; Heo et al., 2021; Liang et al., 2023) have been devoted to detect-
ing DeepFakes using techniques such as attention mechanisms, trans-
former architectures and geometric feature extraction, the potential of 
diffusion processes in enhancing feature extraction for detection has 
not been thoroughly explored. Diffusion processes, grounded in physics 
and biology, describe how elements disperse through a medium (Weigel 
et al., 2011; Metzler et al., 2014) and have been effectively employed in 
tasks like image synthesis, denoising and anomaly detection (Prasath, 
2017). Motivated by the hypothesis that DeepFakes, might exhibit 
unusually rapid diffusion states due to artificial blending of features and 
display odd diffusion patterns as they do not maintain natural image 
coherence (Pan et al., 2019), the core of the proposed approach lies 
on simulating how the inherent structure of a deepfake image diffuses, 
searching for patterns in that process.
In this work, we propose a new Diffusion-based Convolutional Net-
work framework called ‘‘DiffConvNet’’, which extracts features via a dif-
fusion process for enhancing a CNN-based model to detect DeepFakes. 
Utilizing a diffusion network the input image (in fact the encoded 
representation of the first layers of a CNN) is iteratively diffused in 
order to extract its diffused representation states. Then, via a CNN 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cviu.2025.104375
Received 2 July 2024; Received in revised form 2 March 2025; Accepted 23 April 2025
Available online 28 April 2025
1077-3142/© 2025 Elsevier Inc. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.


--- PAGE 2 ---

E. Pintelas and I.E. Livieris
Computer Vision and Image Understanding 257 (2025) 104375
model, we exploit the transient and the final states of diffusion, in 
order to extract features during this diffusion process and finally per-
form the prediction. Unlike prior approaches, which primarily rely 
on advanced architectures to directly analyze input images, the pro-
posed method leverages the iterative diffusion process to reveal hidden 
patterns indicative of manipulation. By integrating a diffusion-based 
framework directly into a CNN pipeline, this study aims to uncover sub-
tle anomalies, enhance feature extraction and improve the robustness 
of DeepFake detection models.
More specifically, the proposed approach incorporates a diffusion 
procedure through the convolutional layers in order to leverage dif-
fusion patterns. In detail, the CNN backbone is initially trained with 
respect to the deepfake classification loss and then, is ‘‘cut’’ into two 
parts (refer also to Fig. 1), forming a Shallow and a Deep Network 
(SN and DN). Next, a Diffusion Network (DiffN) is attached between 
these two network parts forming a SN-DiffN-DN end-to-end network. 
The SN aims to encode the initial image into a more robust and suitable 
form for the diffusion process. Then, the DiffN diffuses the encoded 
representation aiming to reveal deepfake patterns. Finally, the DN aims 
to extract these patterns by exploiting the final and transient states 
of the diffusion procedure, in order to perform the final prediction. 
Additionally, this SN-DiffN-DN network is fine-tuned end-to-end with 
respect to the DeepFake classification loss in order to synergistically 
optimize each main part of this network. This implies that the SN 
is expected to learn better representations for the diffusion layers as 
regards the deepfake detection, the diffusion network is expected to be 
optimized in a way to perform more efficient diffusions with respect 
to the deepfake detection, while the DN will be optimized in order to 
extract in a more efficient way patterns and features via the diffusion 
states.
In our numerical experiments ResNet18 was utilized as a CNN 
backbone due to its high speed-accuracy trade-off performance (He 
et al., 2016; Canziani et al., 2017). Nevertheless, the proposed approach 
can be easily integrated into any CNN backbone network, with mi-
nor modifications. In the ablations studies we also incorporated our 
approach into Xception (Chollet, 2017), and EfficientNet (Tan and 
Le, 2019) backbones since these networks serve as the main utilized 
networks for DeepFake detection (Bonettini et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 
2021).
The main contributions of this research work are summarized as 
follows:
• We propose the idea of leveraging the diffusion process to en-
hance the feature extraction capabilities of CNN models for 
detecting DeepFakes. Building on this idea, we present a new 
diffusion-based CNN framework, which efficiently incorporates 
the diffusion process into state-of-the-art CNN architectures, offer-
ing a flexible and adjustable framework for improved DeepFake 
detection.
• We propose a CNN-based model, which achieves superior per-
formance, compared to state-of-the-art models, for the DeepFake 
detection problem.
• Finally, we conduct a comprehensive experimental analysis pro-
viding insights and interpretations about the reasons of the pro-
posed model’s performance efficacy which strengthens the pro-
posed method trustfulness.
The rest of this paper is followed by the recent related work for 
deepfake detection (Section 2), the detailed presentation of the pro-
posed approach (Section 3), the case-study datasets used in our ex-
periments (Section 4), followed by extensive comparison, ablation and 
visualization studies (Sections 5, 6 and 7 respectively). Finally, our dis-
cussions (Section 8) and conclusions (Section 9) offer insights into the 
effectiveness and potential future directions of proposed methodology 
in the field of DeepFake detection.
2. Related work
In this section, we summarize a wide range of state-of-the-art CNN-
based deepfake detection methodologies. These methods are catego-
rized into feature-based, attention-based, and training-based frame-
works, all of which aim to improve detection by leveraging specific 
properties of the input data.
Feature-Based Frameworks: Feature-based techniques focus on ex-
tracting meaningful representations from images to distinguish real and 
manipulated content. Fine-Tuning (FT) methods (Huang et al., 2021) 
serve as a baseline, adapting pre-trained CNN backbones to the deep-
fake classification task. Facial-Fusion (Tolosana et al., 2022) further 
refine this process by analyzing segmented facial regions and employ-
ing fusion techniques across first and second-generation deepfakes, en-
hancing detection robustness. Facial geometry-based approaches (Liang 
et al., 2023) embed biometric features derived from facial landmarks 
into CNN-LSTM networks, leveraging spatial and frequency domain 
correlations for improved detection. The Multi-View approach (Pintelas 
et al., 2023) focuses on generating diverse perspectives of input images 
using mathematical transformations, enriching feature representations 
through the fusion of pre-trained CNN-extracted features. This tech-
nique has demonstrated improved performance in detecting subtle 
manipulation signs, making it effective for deepfake classification tasks.
Attention-Based Frameworks: Attention mechanisms have been piv-
otal in enhancing deepfake detection. Siamese-Attention techniques
(Bonettini et al., 2021) integrate siamese networks with attention maps 
to refine feature spaces, optimizing them for fine-grained classification. 
Multi-attentional networks (Zhao et al., 2021) extend this concept 
by employing multiple spatial attention heads and textural enhance-
ment blocks to capture subtle anomalies within manipulated regions, 
merging low-level textures and high-level semantics.
Training-Based Frameworks: Training-based frameworks investigate 
advanced training schemes to enhance the robustness and generaliza-
tion of deepfake detection models. Pairwise learning strategies (Hsu 
et al., 2020) employ a two-step process using contrastive loss to train 
CNN models on pairs of images, learning a relational feature space. In 
the second step, a classifier based on this feature space is trained with 
binary cross-entropy loss to predict individual labels. Distillation-based 
models (Heo et al., 2021) utilize a teacher–student training scheme, 
where a pre-trained teacher model transfers knowledge to a smaller 
student model through distillation loss. This design integrates features 
from CNNs with a patch-based positioning model, which was then 
trained to interact with all positions in order to accurately identify ar-
tifact regions; thereby, addressing the false negative problem prevalent 
in previous methods.
In contrast to these approaches, which mainly emphasize on extract-
ing features from the input images through complicated architectures, 
the proposed approach mainly differs in extracting features via the dif-
fusion of input images. This approach is inspired by the hypothesis that 
manipulated images will exhibit unique patterns during the diffusion 
process, which can be critical for detecting deepfakes. By incorporating 
diffusion-based dynamics directly into the network, our method ensures 
compatibility across a variety of CNN backbones. Additionally, the 
diffusion patterns can offer insights into the detection process, enabling 
a deeper understanding of how deepfakes are identified. Detailed ex-
perimental analysis and extended ablation studies reveal the efficacy 
of the proposed approach.
3. Proposed framework
Next, we present the proposed approach starting from an abstract 
overview description, to end up into a comprehensive and detailed 
architectural description.
Fig. 1 illustrates a high-level description of the proposed DiffCon-
vNet model. Initially, a classification neural-network model, using as 
backbone a pre-trained feature extraction network, is fine-tuned with 
2


--- PAGE 3 ---

E. Pintelas and I.E. Livieris
Computer Vision and Image Understanding 257 (2025) 104375
Fig. 1. High-level architectural overview of the DiffConvNet model. The proposed framework integrates a diffusion network between the shallow and deep parts of a pre-trained 
CNN backbone to enhance DeepFake detection by leveraging diffusion-based feature extraction.
respect to the classification loss. Notice that, this backbone network is 
composed by a series of modules of convolution layers followed by a 
classification head (series of dense layers along with the classification 
output layer). Then, this base network (BN) model is split into two 
network parts, forming a Shallow Network (SN) and a Deep Network 
(DN).
Next, the Diffusion Network (DiffN) constituted by convolutional 
layers is attached between the SN and DN. The SN has the objective 
to process the input image, converting it into an encoded and more 
robust representation (denoted as 𝑥0) suitable for diffusion. Next, the 
encoded input 𝑥0 is fed into the DiffN, which iteratively diffuses it 
for 𝑁 iterations. Then, the 𝑥0, the transient diffused representations 
𝑥1, 𝑥2, … , 𝑥𝑁−1 and the final diffusion state 𝑥𝑁 are averaged in order 
to form a comprehensive diffused-representation 𝑑 (it actually contains 
in a compressed form information of the diffusion process). Finally, the 
DN extracts patterns from the diffused representation 𝑑 and performs 
the final prediction. In the sequel, we provide a detailed description of 
the proposed framework focusing on its main steps and its architectural 
design.
3.1. Description of the proposed framework
Initially, a pre-trained base network (BN) is fine-tuned with respect 
to the DeepFake Classification loss ℒ defined as: 
ℒ(̂𝑦, 𝑦; Θ𝐵𝑁) = −𝑦log(̂𝑦) −(1 −𝑦) log(1 −̂ 𝑦)
(1)
where 𝑦 and ̂𝑦 denotes the true and predicted label, respectively (Real 
or Fake), while ΘBN represents the parameters of the base network. 
Thus, given an input image 𝐼, the fine-tuned function 𝐹 of BN can be 
represented as: 
𝐹(𝐼; ΘBN) →̂ 𝑦
(2)
Subsequently, the fine-tuned BN is split to form the shallow network 
(SN) and the deep network (DN). Notice that ΘSN and ΘDN denote 
the parameters of the swallow and deep network, respectively, namely 
ΘBN = [ΘSN, ΘDN]. Furthermore, we employ the Diffusion Network 
(DiffN) for 𝑁 iterations and attach it between the SN and DN; therefore, 
forming DiffConvNet model with parameters: 
ΘDiffConvNet = [ΘSN, ΘDiffN, ΘDN]
(3)
3


--- PAGE 4 ---

E. Pintelas and I.E. Livieris
Computer Vision and Image Understanding 257 (2025) 104375
Given an input image 𝐼, the initial encoded representation 𝑥0 is ex-
tracted from the fine-tuned shallow network namely: 
𝐼
SN
←←←←←←←←←→
𝛩SN
𝑥0
(4)
while through the DiffN with 𝑁 iterations, the diffusion process is 
defined as: 
𝑥0
DiffN
←←←←←←←←←←←←←→
𝛩DiffN
𝑥𝑁
(5)
where 𝑥𝑁 is the output through 𝑁 diffusion iterations and 𝑥1, 𝑥2, … ,
𝑥𝑁−1 are the transient diffusion states in 1, 2, … , 𝑁−1 iterations, 
respectively.
The diffusion process propagates through the network by iteratively 
applying the convolutional operations within the DiffN to the encoded 
representation 𝑥0 generated by the SN. During each iteration, the repre-
sentation evolves into transient states (𝑥1, 𝑥2, … , 𝑥𝑁−1) by progressively 
diffusing its features. These states capture in a dynamic manner the 
patterns and anomalies, with the final state 𝑥𝑁 being the outcome of 
the full diffusion process. The transient states, along with 𝑥0 and 𝑥𝑁, 
are aggregated via averaging to create the diffused representation 𝑑
(Eq. (6)), which is then fed into the DN for final classification (Eq. (7)).
𝑑= 1
𝑁
𝑁
∑
𝑖=0
𝑥𝑖
(6)
𝑑
DN
←←←←←←←←←←→
𝛩DN̂
𝑦
(7)
Finally, based on the same classification loss ℒ defined in Eq. 
(1), we fine-tune the DiffConvNet model. Therefore, given the input 
image 𝐼, the fine-tuned function of the network DiffConvNet can be 
represented as: 
𝐹(𝐼; ΘSN, ΘDiffN, ΘDN) →̂ 𝑦
(8)
Algorithm 1 summarizes the proposed approach in a compact form.
The fine-tuning process of the DiffConvNet model involves opti-
mizing the parameters of the SN, DiffN and DN jointly during the 
end-to-end training. The DeepFake classification loss ℒ is computed 
based on the final prediction of the DN. This loss is back-propagated 
through the entire network, allowing each component to adjust its pa-
rameters in a synergistic manner. Specifically, the SN learns to generate 
encoded representations 𝑥0 that are more suitable for the diffusion 
process, while the DiffN parameters are optimized to reveal subtle 
patterns and anomalies through the iterative diffusion process. The 
DN, in turn, adapts its parameters to effectively extract features from 
the diffused representation 𝑑 and improve classification performance. 
By fine-tuning the entire network end-to-end, the SN, DiffN and DN 
components are collaboratively optimized to enhance the detection of 
DeepFakes, ensuring that the entire architecture works in harmony for 
this task.
3.2. Architecture
Finally, for completeness Tables 1 and 2 present the architecture of 
BN and DiffConvNet, respectively, using ResNet18 as backbone. This 
architectural description serves to provide a comprehensive overview 
of the network components and their configurations, setting a clear 
understanding of the systemic implementations made in this study.
The modules from Layer 0 to Layer 4 correspond to the structured 
design and pre-trained weights inherent to the ResNet18 backbone, 
while global average pooling (GAP) and fully connected (FC) head are 
used in order to adapt to the task of deepfake classification. Each of the 
designated Layers is constructed utilizing the fundamental block design 
of the backbone, constituted with operations including convolutional 
layers, batch normalization and ReLU activation functions. Notice that 
𝐻 and 𝑊 denote the height and width dimensions of the input RGB 
image, respectively. For the purpose of this presentation, we have 
focused primarily on showcasing the dimension reduction resulting 
Algorithm 1 Pseudocode description of proposed framework.
 Inputs:
BN: A Backbone network constituted by modules of convolution 
layers followed by a classification head.
DiffN: A convolution layer repeated 𝑁 times (as the number of 
diffusion iterations).
 Output:
DiffConvNet: Proposed DiffConvNet classification model.
1: Fine-tune BN with respect to DeepFake classification loss ℒ
2: Split the BN to form the SN and DN ⊳ Formulation of DiffConvNet
3: Attach DiffN into the SN and DN to form the DiffConvNet
4: Use SN to encode 𝐼 into 𝑥0
⊳ DiffConvNet inner prediction 
mechanism
5: Use DiffN to diffuse 𝑥0 for 𝑁 iterations and extract 𝑥1, … , 𝑥𝑁
6: Average 𝑥0, … , 𝑥𝑁 to create 𝑑
7: Use DN to encode 𝑑 and predict ̂𝑦
8: Fine-tune DiffConvNet with respect to DeepFake classification loss 
ℒ
Table 1
Architectural presentation of BN for ResNet18 backbone.
 
modules
input
output
 
 
Base Network (BN)
Layer 0
3 × 𝐻× 𝑊
64 × 𝐻
4 × 𝑊
4 
 
Layer 1
64 × 𝐻
4 × 𝑊
4
64 × 𝐻
4 × 𝑊
4 
 
Layer 2
64 × 𝐻
4 × 𝑊
4
128 × 𝐻
8 × 𝑊
8 
 
Layer 3
128 × 𝐻
8 × 𝑊
8
256 × 𝐻
16 × 𝑊
16 
 
Layer 4
256 × 𝐻
16 × 𝑊
16
512 × 𝐻
32 × 𝑊
32 
 
GAP
512 × 𝐻
32 × 𝑊
32
512
 
 
FC Head
512
1
 
Table 2
Architectural presentation of DiffConvNet for ResNet18 backbone.
 
modules
input
output
 
 
DiffConvNet
SN
Layer 0
3 × 𝐻× 𝑊
64 × 𝐻
4 × 𝑊
4
 
 
DiffN
DiffLayer(×𝑁)
64 × 𝐻
4 × 𝑊
4
𝑁× 64 × 𝐻
4 × 𝑊
4 
 
Averaging (dim=0)
𝑁× 64 × 𝐻
4 × 𝑊
4
64 × 𝐻
4 × 𝑊
4
 
 
DN
Layer 1
64 × 𝐻
4 × 𝑊
4
64 × 𝐻
4 × 𝑊
4
 
 
Layer 2
64 × 𝐻
4 × 𝑊
4
128 × 𝐻
8 × 𝑊
8
 
 
Layer 3
128 × 𝐻
8 × 𝑊
8
256 × 𝐻
16 × 𝑊
16
 
 
Layer 4
256 × 𝐻
16 × 𝑊
16
512 × 𝐻
32 × 𝑊
32
 
 
GAP
512 × 𝐻
32 × 𝑊
32
512
 
 
FC Head
512
1
 
from the strides in each layer. Factors like padding, kernel size and 
other parameters, while important, are not detailed in this overview 
for brevity and clarity.
In this scheme, the BN is split between Layer 0 and Layer 1; 
thus, forming SN constituted of Layer 0 and DN constituted of layers: 
{Layer 1, Layer 2, Layer 3, Layer 4, GAP, FC Head}. The DiffN is then 
attached between SN and DN forming thus the DiffConvNet. The DiffN 
is composed by a DiffLayer, which consists of a convolutional layer of 
3 × 3 kernel size and an Averaging operation. The DiffLayer is repeated 
𝑁 times (the iteration number of diffusion), while Averaging operation 
averages the 𝑁 diffused representations (initial, transient, and final 
states) into a unified diffused representation.
4


--- PAGE 5 ---

E. Pintelas and I.E. Livieris
Computer Vision and Image Understanding 257 (2025) 104375
4. DeepFake case-study datasets
In order to guarantee diversity in our experimental simulations, we 
have used three different types of fake manipulation datasets namely, 
DeepFake Detection Challenge (DFDC), DeepFakeMnist+ (DFMNIST+) 
and EXPerts professional photoshop designers (EXP) datasets, and also 
a mixed one (MIXED), which is a mixed version of DFDC, DFMNIST+ 
and EXP.
DFDC dataset (Dolhansky et al., 2020) is currently the largest public 
facial forgery dataset being a collaborative endeavor by AWS, Face-
book, Microsoft and the Partnership on AI’s Media Integrity Steering 
Committee to counter the proliferation of deepfakes. Derived from 
GAN-generated fakes, it originally captured diverse individuals across 
various settings. For our experiments, we created a curated version1 
incorporating one image frame per video, isolating also the faces from 
every individual in the videos, comprising in total around 100000
instances.
DFMNIST+ (Huang et al., 2021) offers animated video data har-
nessed through the First Order Motion Model for Image Animation. 
It showcases 10,000 legitimate videos from VoxCeleb1, complemented 
by an equal number of animations stemming from the real videos. 
The animation videos vividly imitate a range of actions, from blinking 
to surprise and embarrassment, realized through a plethora of actors. 
Notably, to ensure quality, all animations successfully deceived contem-
porary liveness detectors, with prominent ones being from Baidu and 
Tianyan.
However, the ‘‘real’’ dataset did not have a unique actor ID for each 
instance; hence, in a 10-fold evaluation with random splits, the model 
risked on distinguishing based on persons instead of genuinely distin-
guishing between real and fake. This is because repeated appearances of 
the same individual across training and test sets could lead the model 
to recognize person-specific characteristics rather than discerning au-
thenticity, introducing a potential bias. To sidestep this concern, we 
ensured each instance in our dataset represented a unique individual, 
preventing the model from resorting to person-specific recognition and 
compelling it to truly discern between real and fake.
The EXP dataset is a remarkable work of professional Photoshop 
designers of the Computational Intelligence and Photography Lab at 
Yonsei University’s Computer Science Department. It uniquely fea-
tures injected facial elements, such as eyes, noses, and mouths, trans-
posed onto different faces. This dataset comprises around 1000 genuine 
and 1000 manipulated facial images, with the latter spanning varying 
degrees of detection difficulty. Leveraging EXP, we aspire to detect 
genuine fake-image markers, bypassing potential incidental patterns 
produced by GANs.
Aiming for a robust and comprehensive evaluation, we have also 
integrated these three distinct fake manipulation datasets. By com-
bining these three datasets into a unified MIXED dataset, we aim to 
cover a wide range of manipulative techniques prevalent in the real 
world. This fusion not only adds diversity in the types of manipulations 
our model is exposed to but also enhances its generalization ability in 
different situations. Such a diverse training ensures that our model is 
not narrowly tailored to a specific kind of manipulation but is resilient 
against a variety of manipulation methods. Ultimately, this mixed-
dataset approach reinforces our evaluation’s reliability and underscores 
our model’s adaptability in a more real-world scenario.
5. Comparison study
In this section, we present the experimental results from the com-
parison of the proposed model (DiffConvNet) with the state-of-the-art 
DeepFake detection approaches. Among them, a wide and diverse 
1 This version of this dataset can be found in the following link
range of different CNN-based methodologies were included (Fine-
Tuning (Huang et al., 2021), Facial-Fusion (Tolosana et al., 2022), 
Facial-Geometry (Liang et al., 2023), Pairwise (Hsu et al., 2020), 
Siamese & Attention (Bonettini et al., 2021), Multi-View (Pintelas et al., 
2023), Multi-Attentional (Zhao et al., 2021), and Distillation (Heo et al., 
2021)), in order to perform comprehensible experimental comparisons.
5.1. Experimental setup
In this comparison the proposed approach was implemented with 
𝑁
=
5 (the effect of higher number of diffusion iterations were 
investigated in our ablation study in Section 6.2). In order to guarantee 
fairness in the experiments we have followed the following global 
experimental settings in all models described as follows:
• ResNet18 was selected as CNN backbone in all approaches be-
cause of its high balance between speed and accuracy (He et al., 
2016; Canziani et al., 2017).
• The input dimensions of facial images for every dataset for every 
model was set to 256 × 256. We must clarify that, the raw frames 
per video instance specifically for the DFDC dataset was much 
higher around to 1000 × 1000. However since we cropped the 
faces per instance frame, the extracted facial images had much 
lower dimensions around to 256 × 256.
• As regards the training parameters, Adam optimizer (Kingma and 
Ba, 2014) was used with an initial learning rate (10−4) followed 
by reduce-learning-rate-on-plateau scheduler (Smith, 2017) in 
order to upgrade the learning rate with respect to the validation 
score (for every 5 epochs where there was no improvement, the 
learning was decreasing by a 0.7 factor). Additionally, early-
stopping (Goodfellow et al., 2016) and weight-decay (Loshchilov 
and Hutter, 2019) were used in order to prevent over-fitting. In 
particular for early stopping, if there was no validation improve-
ment for 10 epochs the training was terminated, while for weight 
decay, a coefficient of 10−4 was applied to the L2 regularization 
term, which penalizes large weights in the models.
• For solidness and robustness in the outcome results, 10-fold cross 
validation was also applied in all experimental evaluations. More 
specifically, 10 distinct folds were created comprised by a 90% 
training and 10% testing ratio each. Also, for each training fold, a 
separate validation set was also used (10% ratio of the remaining 
90% training set fold) in order to apply the reduce-learning-
rate-on-plateau scheduler and early stopping strategies described 
before. The final testing results were extracted by averaging the 
testing accuracy of each distinct testing fold (10 in total).
• The evaluation was based on the following performance metrics: 
Accuracy (Acc) in %, Area Under Curve (AUC), and Geomet-
ric Mean (GM) score. Acc is a straightforward method, which 
provides a direct measure of correct predictions but may be 
misleading for imbalanced datasets. AUC takes into account the 
probabilistic outputs of the model evaluating its ability to distin-
guish between classes across various thresholds offering higher 
evaluation depth beyond binary outcomes while GM is a robust 
metric, which measures the balance between sensitivity and speci-
ficity ensuring balanced performance across both classes (Pintelas 
and Pintelas, 2022).
It is worth mentioning that the numerical experiments and compar-
isons prioritize in the main concept and unique research value of each 
method. Our aim is to avoid adding extra complexities that are more 
suitable for real-world or competitions situations. Thus, we did not 
include advanced augmentations and backbones to boost performance, 
which might overshadow the true efficiency of our proposed method 
for deepfake detection.
5


--- PAGE 6 ---

E. Pintelas and I.E. Livieris
Computer Vision and Image Understanding 257 (2025) 104375
Table 3
Performance comparison of DiffConvNet with state-of-the-art DeepFake detection methods across four datasets (DFDC, DFMNIST+, EXP, MIXED). Metrics include Accuracy (Acc), 
Area Under the Curve (AUC), and Geometric Mean (GM) with the best results highlighted in bold.
 Approaches
DFDC
DFMNIST+
EXP
MIXED
 
Acc
AUC
GM
Acc
AUC
GM
Acc
AUC
GM
Acc
AUC
GM 
 Fine-Tuning
90.4
0.930
0.825
86.6
0.948
0.860
68.0
0.744
0.679
91.5
0.946
0.828 
 Facial-Fusion
93.2
0.959
0.847
87.5
0.946
0.867
70.9
0.783
0.707
91.9
0.953
0.832 
 Facial-Geometry
92.8
0.958
0.822
87.1
0.951
0.865
70.2
0.753
0.701
91.8
0.951
0.844 
 Pairwise
92.7
0.957
0.838
88.5
0.956
0.868
68.9
0.763
0.684
91.4
0.954
0.841 
 Siamese-Attention
91.4
0.951
0.837
87.1
0.940
0.862
67.1
0.754
0.670
91.3
0.953
0.855 
 Multi-View
87.8
0.934
0.845
85.2
0.928
0.838
71.1
0.778
0.709
91.6
0.955
0.840 
 Multi-Attentional
91.5
0.953
0.857
87.5
0.945
0.873
70.7
0.782
0.704
92.4
0.956
0.856 
 Distillation
92.8
0.956
0.832
88.2
0.949
0.875
69.9
0.758
0.697
92.6
0.954
0.843 
 DiffConvNet
92.9
0.962
0.860
88.5
0.953
0.877
71.2
0.791
0.711
91.7
0.959
0.864 
Finally, in order to guarantee full transparency in the presented 
comparisons, the implementation code of the proposed model alongside 
with every other model can be found in.2
5.2. Numerical performance results
Table 3 summarizes the performance of all utilized DeepFake de-
tection approaches applied on four facial manipulation datasets. Notice 
that the best performance for each metric is highlighted in bold.
As regards DFDC dataset, the proposed model exhibits the best over-
all performance, achieving an accuracy of 92.9%, AUC score of 0.962, 
and GM score of 0.860, indicating superior robustness in detecting 
DeepFakes on the DFDC dataset. Regarding the DFMNIST+ dataset, 
Pairwise approach reports the best performance relative to accuracy 
and AUC scores closely followed by DiffConvNet, which presented 
almost identical performance. In addition, the proposed model high-
lighted the best GM score (0.877), which implies that it exhibits the 
best accuracy balance across both classes.
In the context of the EXP dataset, the proposed model demonstrated 
superior performance compared to other state-of-the-art models, no-
tably in the AUC score. Although the difference between the proposed 
model and the Multi-View is relative small in terms of accuracy (71.2% 
compared to 71.1%) and GM (0.711 compared to 0.709), our model 
achieved a substantial difference in terms of AUC (0.791 compared 
to 0.778). This performance indicates the model’s efficiency in detect-
ing professionally crafted manipulations, which are usually harder to 
detect, showcasing its utility in practical, real-world situations where 
high-quality manipulations are often encountered.
Finally, as regards the MIXED dataset, the proposed model demon-
strates the best overall performance, reporting the highest score in 
two performance metrics, namely AUC (0.959) and GM (0.864). It is 
worth mentioning that the reported scores, provide strong empirical 
evidence about the considerable differences between the performance 
of the proposed model against the state-of-the-art models relative to 
both classes.
For providing strong statistical evidence about the effectiveness of 
the proposed DiffConvNet model, a statistical analysis is conducted for 
evaluating the hypothesis 𝐻0 that all models present equally accurate 
predictions. For this purpose, non-parametric Friedman Aligned-Ranks 
(FAR) test (Hodges Jr. and Lehmann, 2011) is employed for ranking 
the models based on a performance metric; while Finner post-hoc 
test (Finner, 1993) with significance level 𝛼= 5% is used for examining 
the existence of considerable differences and the presence of signifi-
cant variations in their predictions, without any assumption about the 
distribution of the performance scores (Kiriakidou et al., 2024).
Tables 4–6 present the statistical analysis based on Acc, AUC and 
GM performance metrics, respectively. In all cases, the DiffConvNet 
reports the highest probability ranking based on FAR test. In addition, 
2 https://github.com/EmmanuelPintelas/A-Diffusion-CNN-model-for-
DeepFake-Image-Detection
Table 4
Statistical analysis: FAR and Li post-hoc tests results relative to Acc metric.
 Model
Friedman
Finner post-hoc test
 
Ranking
𝑝-value
𝐻0
 
 DiffConvNet
8.125
–
–
 
 Facial-Fusion
10.875
0.00596
Rejected 
 Distillation
12.875
0.000002
Rejected 
 Multi-Attentional
16.125
0.0
Rejected 
 Facial-Geometry
17.000
0.0
Rejected 
 Pairwise
18.625
0.0
Rejected 
 Multi-View
23.750
0.0
Rejected 
 Siamese-Attention
28.875
0.0
Rejected 
 Fine-Tuning
30.250
0.0
Rejected 
Table 5
Statistical analysis: FAR and Li post-hoc tests results relative to AUC metric.
 Model
Friedman
Finner post-hoc test
 
Ranking
𝑝-value
𝐻0
 
 DiffConvNet
6.250
–
–
 
 Facial-Fusion
13.625
0.0
Rejected
 
 Multi-Attentional
14.750
0.0
Rejected
 
 Pairwise
15.625
0.0
Rejected
 
 Distillation
18.875
0.0
Rejected
 
 Facial-Geometry
19.750
0.0
Rejected
 
 Multi-View
22.500
0.0
Rejected
 
 Siamese-Attention
25.875
0.0
Rejected
 
 Fine-Tuning
29.250
0.0
Rejected
 
Table 6
Statistical analysis: FAR and Li post-hoc tests results relative to GM metric.
 Model
Friedman
Finner post-hoc test
 
Ranking
𝑝-value
𝐻0
 
 DiffConvNet
3.250
–
–
 
 Multi-Attentional
8.375
0.0
Rejected
 
 Facial-Fusion
16.875
0.0
Rejected
 
 Distillation
19.250
0.0
Rejected
 
 Multi-View
20.500
0.0
Rejected
 
 Facial-Geometry
21.750
0.0
Rejected
 
 Siamese-Attention
22.750
0.0
Rejected
 
 Pairwise
23.000
0.0
Rejected
 
 Fine-Tuning
30.750
0.0
Rejected
 
Li post-hoc test presents that there exist significant differences between 
the performance of DiffConvNet and the rest models, which highlights 
the effectiveness and prediction accuracy of the proposed model.
Summarizing, the presented numerical experiments highlight that 
the proposed model presented the best overall performance. In addi-
tion, they indicate the model’s reliability and efficiency in distinguish-
ing real from manipulated content effectively and its ability to handle 
a wide range of manipulations, reinforcing its robustness to generalize 
effectively across diverse types of facial manipulations.
6


--- PAGE 7 ---

E. Pintelas and I.E. Livieris
Computer Vision and Image Understanding 257 (2025) 104375
Table 7
Analysis of the effect of splitting point depths in the DiffConvNet model. 
Depth 0 corresponds to applying the diffusion network directly on the 
raw input, while Depth 1–4 refer to progressively deeper splits within 
the backbone.
 DiffConvNet
Acc
AUC
GM 
 Depth 0
90.2
0.928
0.812 
 Depth 1
91.7
0.959
0.864 
 Depth 2
92.0
0.957
0.839 
 Depth 3
92.3
0.956
0.817 
 Depth 4
89.5
0.929
0.790 
6. Ablation study
In this section, we engage a detailed exploration of the effective-
ness of the proposed approach through an ablation study, which is 
structured into two categories: Splitting-depth impact and Accuracy-
speed trade-off. Each of these studies investigates specific aspects of 
the proposed approach, providing insights into its effectiveness and 
adjustability. For the purpose of this analysis, we choose the MIXED 
dataset due to its rich diversity in manipulation techniques, since 
this dataset is a synthesis of the three major utilized dataset sources: 
DFDC, DFMNIST+, and EXP; making it an ideal choice for a broad and 
comprehensive assessment.
6.1. Splitting-depth impact
In this study, we examine the influence of different depths for the 
base network’s (BN) splitting point. These depths range from the initial 
image (Depth 0) to deeper layers (Depth 1–4). Specifically, Depth 0 
means that the DiffN is applied directly to the raw input image. Depth 
1 specifies that the DiffN is integrated between Layer 0 and Layer 
1, Depth 2 between Layer 1 and Layer 2, and so forth. For a more 
comprehensive understanding of the network’s modules and layers, we 
refer to Table 2.
Based on the presented results in Table 7, it is evident that Depth 
1 achieves the most balanced and superior results across the evaluated 
metrics, which balances between preserving the inherent coherence of 
the image and leveraging the feature insights provided by the early 
transformations of base network.
Consequently, Depth 1 is considered the most optimal depth for 
integrating the diffusion network and is adopted as the standard config-
uration for all experiments in this study. This depth demonstrates the 
efficacy of incorporating diffusion processes at initial layers, allowing 
for meaningful representations and feature extraction while retaining 
the essential characteristics and coherence of the input image.
6.2. Accuracy-speed trade-off
This study delves into the applicability of the proposed method 
across various CNN backbones. Although we primarily used ResNet for 
the experimental analysis because of its high balance between speed 
and accuracy, our methodology is not restricted to this backbone. 
Furthermore, we employed the proposed approach to other popular 
CNN architectures, namely Xception (Tolosana et al., 2022) and Ef-
ficientNet (EfficientNet-B0) (Raza et al., 2023), which are frequently 
applied in DeepFake detection. Finally, we conducted an Accuracy-
Speed Trade-off analysis by integrating our diffusion-based approach 
into these utilized CNN backbones in order to examine the impact of 
various number of diffusion iterations 𝑁 with respect to the prediction 
performance and the time overhead (total inference prediction time in 
seconds given a batch of instances).
Table 8 presents the performance results for the proposed DiffCon-
vNet model, applied to various CNN backbones, with the diffusion 
iterations set to 𝑁= 5. Clearly, the incorporation of the diffusion 
Table 8
Performance results of proposed DiffConvNet (𝑁= 5) approach applied on various CNN 
backbones.
 Models
Evaluation Metrics
CPU time 
 
Acc
AUC
GM
(in secs) 
 ResNet18
91.5
0.946
0.828
0.004
 
 Diffusion - ResNet18
91.7
0.959
0.864
0.005
 
 Xception41
90.8
0.945
0.843
0.014
 
 Diffusion - Xception41
92.7
0.962
0.853
0.015
 
 EfficientNet
92.9
0.964
0.858
0.013
 
 Diffusion – EfficientNet
93.1
0.967
0.879
0.014
 
process enhances the performance across all utilized backbones, sub-
stantiating the efficacy of the proposed methodology in improving 
deepfake detection. The models exhibit improvement in all metrics 
especially in Auc and GM, showcasing additionally the approach’s 
effectiveness.
As regards the computation cost, based on Table 8, there is approx-
imately a 7% increase in time overhead for medium-heavy backbones 
like Xception and EfficientNet. This implies that the integration of the 
diffusion process does not significantly amplify the computational com-
plexity of already complex and large networks, rendering the approach 
practical for more advanced models. However, for lighter models like 
ResNet18, there is a substantial, around 25% increase in time overhead. 
This underscores that while the methodology is generally beneficial, the 
impact on CPU time is more pronounced for lightweight models due to 
the relative increase in complexity.
In summary, these results indicate a well-balanced trade-off with 
the observed performance improvement leading to the fact that the 
increase in computational demand is worthy due to the significant 
performance gains.
Fig. 2 illustrates the trade-off between AUC performance and com-
putation time of the three distinct utilized CNN backbones: ResNet18, 
Xception41, and EfficientNet, each enhanced with varying numbers of 
diffusion iterations 𝑁. Each point on the graph represents a distinct 
count of diffusion iterations (𝑁= 0, 5, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50) incorporated 
into each backbone (the 𝑁= 0 refers to the initial standard CNN 
backbone without incorporating our proposed approach). The 𝑥-axis 
signifies the computation time, showcasing the overhead introduced by 
the diffusion process, while the 𝑦-axis depicts the AUC performance.
The interpretation of Fig. 2 suggests that both EfficientNet and 
ResNet demonstrate a superior balance between performance and com-
putation time compared to Xception when incorporating the proposed 
diffusion methodology. As the number of diffusion iterations increases 
the computation time overhead for EfficientNet remains relatively sta-
ble achieving also the highest performance. On the other hand, ResNet, 
given its lightweight architecture, experiences a significant increase in 
computation time via the incorporation of diffusion process. However, 
it is noteworthy that the integration of the diffusion process into ResNet 
results in significant performance gains (enabling it to achieve the 
performance levels of EfficientNet), in contrast to EfficientNet which 
shows modest performance improvement across the increased diffusion 
iterations.
In summary, the findings of this ablation study imply to the fact 
that the proposed approach can be extended to a wide range of CNN 
backbones (compatibility property), improving also their prediction 
performance for identifying deepfakes (performance property), fol-
lowed by a stable time overhead cost as 𝑁 increases especially for 
larger and more complex architectures (scalability property).
7. Visualization study
Last but not least, we also conducted comprehensive visualiza-
tion studies in order to enhance trust providing explanations and 
reasoning of the proposed model’s efficacy that are meaningful and 
7


--- PAGE 8 ---

E. Pintelas and I.E. Livieris
Computer Vision and Image Understanding 257 (2025) 104375
Fig. 2. Analysis of the accuracy-speed trade-off for different CNN backbones (ResNet18, Xception41, EfficientNet) integrated with the proposed diffusion methodology. Each point 
corresponds to a specific number of diffusion iterations (𝑁), demonstrating the balance between computational cost and performance.
closer to human understanding, rather than relying solely on numerical 
outcomes. Specifically, we conducted interpretability evaluations and 
visualization of the diffusion states, for our proposed approach.
7.1. Predictions’ interpretation
In order to enhance the reliability and trustfulness of our model, 
we performed a Grad-Cam-based (Livieris et al., 2023; Selvaraju et al., 
2017) interpretation of predictions (Fig. 3), applied on the Exp dataset 
(due to the fact that the exact locations where the manipulations took 
place3 in the facial images are known). For this task, we presented 
various ‘‘extreme’’ case study instances for visual evaluation to further 
emphasize our point. These instances are challenging because what 
appears ‘‘real’’ might seem ‘‘fake’’ and vice versa.
The primary objective is to demonstrate that the model accurately 
focuses on the appropriate regions during its decision-making process. 
In contexts where specific manipulated regions are known (as with the 
Exp dataset), it is vital to ensure that the model’s attention correctly 
aligns with these areas to establish its reliability (Pintelas et al., 2021). 
It is essential thus to verify that the model concentrates on at least 
one manipulated region when predicting fake instances, which serves 
as a crucial indicator of its effectiveness and trustworthiness in detect-
ing manipulations. If the model instead, focuses on irrelevant regions 
(e.g., the model focuses on hair, while the manipulation took place 
in eyes and mouth), its reliability would be questionable, even if the 
prediction is technically correct (Pintelas et al., 2020).
For image (C), depicted in Fig. 3, where manipulations are exclu-
sively in the eyes (1100), the model notably focuses on these specific 
regions to classify the image as ‘‘fake’’. Whereas in image (B) which 
features manipulations in both the eyes and nose (1110), the model’s 
attention focus more broadly, encompassing both eyes and the nose. In 
addition, in the case of image (D) (1111), the model’s focus extends 
beyond the eyes and nose, also encompassing the mouth area. This 
3 Each manipulation is denoted by a binary four-digit code indicating which 
parts of the face were altered (left eye, right eye, nose, mouth). For instance, 
the code ‘1100’ signifies that both eyes were manipulated, while the nose and 
mouth remain original.
observation is a positive indication given the known alterations across 
the eyes, nose, and mouth regions in this image.
Furthermore, for the real image (E), one can initially suspect ma-
nipulation due to the slightly asymmetrical and darker appearance of 
the left eye. So, the model properly focuses on this potential anomaly 
to determine whether it is a manipulation or not, ultimately making 
the correct decision that the image is real. Unfortunately, the model 
misinterpreted the image (F). The natural makeup on the subject’s face 
misled the model, primarily because the makeup around the left eye 
looks like to a possible fake manipulation, causing it to be misclassified 
as ‘‘fake’’.
7.2. Diffusion states’ interpretation
Finally, we also attempted to visualize the transient diffusion states 
from 0 to 50 of the diffusion network process (for 𝑁= 50 iterations), 
applied to the encoded representation of SN, using a ResNet18 back-
bone with a splitting point at Depth 1 (as described in Table 2). This 
allows us to illustrate the diffusion impact of our approach on some 
case study instances, as presented in Fig. 4.
We recall, that DeepFakes may show either unusually rapid diffu-
sion states due to the artificial elements merging or exhibit strange 
diffusion patterns as they might not preserve the inherent coherence 
of a natural image. The primary objective of the diffusion approach 
is to discern potential distinctions between these scenarios. Through 
these visualizations, our aim is to provide empirical evidence by explor-
ing whether discernible patterns emerge during the diffusion process, 
allowing for a more intuitive understanding of the proposed method 
beyond solely relying on numerical experimental results. However, it is 
important to acknowledge that such patterns may be subtle, ambiguous, 
or even imperceptible to the human eye. Our goal is not to claim that 
these visuals definitively expose DeepFakes but rather to demonstrate 
how the diffusion process refines and enriches the initial encoded 
representation, potentially aiding a CNN model in detecting DeepFakes 
more effectively.
As presented in Fig. 4, for the ‘‘real’’ cases, the transition through 
each transient diffusion state appears smoother, more natural and more 
stable. In contrast, the ‘‘fake’’ cases exhibit more abrupt and unnatural 
8


--- PAGE 9 ---

E. Pintelas and I.E. Livieris
Computer Vision and Image Understanding 257 (2025) 104375
Fig. 3. Grad-Cam visualization of the DiffConvNet model’s predictions on real and manipulated facial images from the EXP dataset. The highlighted regions indicate the model’s 
focus areas for decision-making, demonstrating its ability to detect manipulated regions effectively.
Fig. 4. Sequential visualization of the transient diffusion states for ‘‘real’’ and ‘‘fake’’ images across 50 iterations of proposed diffusion network. The diffusion process exposes 
distinct patterns, with manipulated images displaying abrupt transitions and inconsistencies compared to smoother transitions in authentic images.
transitions; for example in the transition from states 4 to 5 to 6 for the 
‘‘fake’’ case (D).
Furthermore, the ‘‘fake’’ cases exhibit more odd and inconsistent 
diffusion patterns. For example, in the ‘‘fake’’ case (B), noticeable 
inconsistencies emerge in states 6, 8, 12, and 26, where unnatural struc-
tural deviations can be observed. In particular, for this case, the left 
eye appears inconsistent with the right eye, which appears significantly 
lighter/highlighted. This asymmetry strongly suggests a manipulation 
artifact/pattern, especially since we already know that the eyes of this 
person were manipulated by blending them with another person’s facial 
features3. In contrast to the ‘‘real’’ cases, where facial features are 
diffused more smoothly, preserving their overall spatial structure and 
coherence without too many deviations.
Additionally, we conducted two additional experiments to visually 
evaluate and compare alternative diffusion-like processes: (1) iterative 
Gaussian blurring and (2) Gaussian noise-based diffusion (Xiao et al., 
2024). Both methods were also applied to the output of SN (using 
the same splitting point at Depth 1, refer to Table 2), ensuring a fair 
baseline for comparison.
The comparison between the network-based diffusion process
(Fig. 4) and the two Gaussian-based transformations (Figs. 5 and 6) 
highlight the distinct advantages of the proposed approach:
• Gaussian blurring (Fig. 5): This process progressively smooths the 
image, causing an indiscriminate loss of fine-grained details. Both 
real and fake images undergo similar degradation, preventing it 
from exposing any deepfake-specific inconsistencies.
• Gaussian diffusion (Fig. 6): This method introduces progressive 
noise, leading to stochastic image degradation. Interestingly, 
some manipulation artifacts persist throughout the diffusion pro-
cess (e.g., the left manipulated eye in the fake case (B)), which 
aligns with our hypothesis that manipulated images might ex-
hibit distinct diffusion patterns due to their unnatural statistical 
properties. However, unlike the proposed diffusion network (Fig. 
4), Gaussian diffusion lacks a learnable filtering mechanism. 
As a result, the process does not selectively highlight manipu-
lated artifacts and inconsistencies to further reveal discriminative 
features.
9


--- PAGE 10 ---

E. Pintelas and I.E. Livieris
Computer Vision and Image Understanding 257 (2025) 104375
Fig. 5. Sequential visualization of iterative Gaussian blurring applied to ‘‘real’’ and ‘‘fake’’ images across 50 iterations. This serves as a baseline comparison to assess the proposed 
diffusion process’s effects. Gaussian blurring leads to a homogeneous loss of detail, lacking the discriminative features observed in the transitions of Fig. 4.
Fig. 6. Sequential visualization of Gaussian noise-based diffusion applied to ‘‘real’’ and ‘‘fake’’ images across 50 iterations. This method introduces progressive noise, revealing 
some manipulation artifacts due to unnatural statistical properties. However, unlike the proposed network-based diffusion approach, it lacks its learnable mechanism, preventing 
it from selectively highlighting deepfake inconsistencies and enhancing discriminative features.
These findings demonstrate that the proposed network-based dif-
fusion framework is not merely a random noise operation, but a tar-
geted diffusion mechanism acting as a learnable feature extraction and 
filtering process for DeepFake detection.
8. Discussion & reasoning of methodology
In this Section, we provide a thorough reasoning and discussion 
of the key procedures and methods used in the proposed approach. 
This includes the diffusion procedure and methodology in general, 
the rationale behind the initial fine-tuning procedure (step 1)4, the 
cutting/splitting-based approach (step 2), the decision on the splitting 
‘‘depth’’ which involves whether to split shallowly or more deeply (step 
4), the averaging of the diffused representation (step 6), and the final 
end-to-end DiffConvNet fine-tuning (step 8).
4 Steps 1–8 refer to the steps of Fig. 1 of Section 3.
As regards the diffusion procedure, our approach is motivated by 
the intuition that deepfakes could exhibit unusual diffusion states due 
to unnatural artificial blending. However, we consider essential to 
clarify that the diffusion process could not perform just by itself all the 
‘‘hard job’’ for exposing the deepfake manipulations; it also requires 
an efficient image encoding for performing diffusion and an efficient 
exploitation of the diffusion process, in order to extract patterns and 
features. In fact, the diffusion process mainly aims on assisting a CNN 
classifier (DN) to detect deepfakes by providing it with a ‘‘richer’’ 
representation (diffused-representation: 𝑑), compared to providing only 
the encoded feature maps (𝑥0) of the initial image as extracted via the 
shallow convolutional layers of a standard CNN backbone.
Regarding the rationale of the method used for creating diffu-
sion process, it is described as follows: Diffusion processes, funda-
mental to many physical and mathematical models, are typically rep-
resented using Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) (Gilboa and Os-
her, 2009; Osher and Shen, 2019). Traditional methods for simu-
lating these processes have often employed techniques derived from 
10


--- PAGE 11 ---

E. Pintelas and I.E. Livieris
Computer Vision and Image Understanding 257 (2025) 104375
PDEs, such as Gaussian diffusion (Xiao et al., 2024), Laplacian dif-
fusion (Osher and Shen, 2019), anisotropic diffusion (Tsiotsios and 
Petrou, 2013), and bilateral filtering (Paris et al., 2009). Instead, we 
adopted a convolutional-based approach allowing for a flexible, ef-
ficient, and highly parallelizable diffusion simulation. Convolutional 
layers can be interpreted as discrete approximations to PDEs, since in a 
convolution operation, the filters (or kernels) serve functions analogous 
to the spatial derivatives in PDEs (Ruthotto and Haber, 2020; Kag and 
Saligrama, 2022). Therefore, interpreting convolutional operations as 
approximations to PDEs it is a logical step to suggest that convolutional 
layers can simulate diffusion processes.
Regarding the rationale of the initial fine-tuning procedure, it is 
described as follows: Since we cut/split the BN into two sub-networks 
(SN and DN), the initial fine-tuning procedure of BN aims to ensure 
that the SN will encode the input image into a more relevant encoded 
representation 𝑥0 with respect to the deepfake task. Thus, the diffusion 
input 𝑥0 may have already highlighted some initial deepfake patterns, 
while now since the diffusion process will start its operation from a 
better initial point, it can perform more ‘‘targeted’’ diffusion on 𝑥0, 
for augmenting even more the deepfake’s feature extraction proce-
dure; hence, providing more enriched data representations for the DN 
classifier.
As regards the reasoning for adopting the splitting-based approach, 
we clarify it as follows: Instead of using separate custom-designed 
Shallow Network (SN) and Deep Network (DN), we aim to leverage 
the prior knowledge encapsulated in a pre-trained CNN backbone, such 
as ResNet. Consequently, we strategically split this backbone into two 
sub-networks: the SN, tasked with encoding input images into compact, 
robust, and noise-reduced latent representations ideal for targeted dif-
fusion, and the DN, specialized in extracting high-level features from 
the diffusion outcomes and performing the final classification. This 
methodology provides significant advantages in terms of functionality, 
adjustability, and performance since our diffusion-based strategy can 
seamlessly integrate with various CNN backbones, fully exploiting their 
pre-trained weights.
However, the question of identifying an optimal splitting depth 
arises naturally: Why not directly apply diffusion to raw input im-
ages, or why not utilize deeper latent representations? The rationale 
behind our selected splitting point involves carefully balancing two 
critical factors: retaining the inherent natural coherence of images and 
effectively extracting meaningful representations for diffusion. Splitting 
the network at excessively deep layers would risk losing essential 
coherent structural information inherent to natural images, render-
ing the diffusion process inefficient. Our method fundamentally relies 
on detecting unnatural diffusion patterns characteristic of DeepFakes, 
which requires preserving initial image coherence. On the other hand, 
applying diffusion directly at the raw pixel level (depth 0) would be 
significantly more computationally expensive and less efficient, as raw 
images contain redundant information and irrelevant noise, bypassing 
valuable preliminary structural transformations performed by the ini-
tial network layers. To empirically justify this choice, our ablation study 
(Section 6.1) presents a comprehensive performance analysis across 
multiple splitting depths, ranging from raw input images (depth 0) to 
progressively deeper encoded layers (e.g., depths 1 and 2).
For the decision to average the diffused representations, the primary 
motivations are for ensuring robustness and preserving the structure 
and weight configuration of the used CNN backbone. More specifically, 
by averaging the transient diffusion states, the model minimizes the 
effect of noise and potential outliers that might have been introduced 
during the diffusion process. This approach effectively works as an 
ensemble method within the diffusion layers, aggregating the outcomes 
and thereby increasing stability and robustness.
Also, the diffusion process, by its very nature, captures varying 
feature scales and patterns across different states. Averaging them aims 
to fuse these diverse feature representations into a unified feature map. 
This operation ensures that the network benefits from the rich patterns 
captured across different diffusion states, resulting in a more compre-
hensive and integrated feature representation for the subsequent layers 
of the DN.
Furthermore, it is necessary to ensure that the input representation 
for the DN matches the ancestral BN architecture. This is particularly 
crucial as regards the adaptability property to maintain the weight 
structure and more importantly, the integrity of the utilized CNN 
backbone. By averaging the diffusion states, the network maintains a 
consistent input dimensionality that aligns with the requirements of the 
downstream modules in the DN. For example, in out context, the DiffN, 
given an encoded representation 𝑥0 of dimensions 64 × 𝐻
4 × 𝑊
4 , creates 
a 𝑁× 64 × 𝐻
4 × 𝑊
4 representation (Table 2), which does not match the 
64 × 𝐻
4 × 𝑊
4 input dimensions of DN. Thus, by averaging the diffused 
representation we ensure that the output of DiffN will match the input 
dimensions of DN preserving thus the CNN backbone’s architecture.
Finally, as regards the final end-to-end DiffConvNet model’s fine-
tuning with respect to the DeepFake classification loss, one basic reason 
is to optimize the DN to adjust to its new input representation. Origi-
nally, the DN was fine-tuned via the BN’s initial fine-tuning process, 
adapted to identify patterns from the 𝑥0 representation. However, 
with its new input being the diffused representation 𝑑, it will have 
to re-adjust its weights to discern the patterns lied into this new 
representation. Also, we let the SN and DiffN weights to get updated. 
This aims to let the SN to learn an even better encoded representation 
for diffusion further optimized via the end-to-end training, while since 
for the diffusion process we do not use a fixed diffusion function like 
gaussian, we let instead the model, via the end-to-end training, to find 
its own diffusion function which will be more optimal regarding the 
deepfake detection task.
9. Conclusions
This work focuses on image-based DeepFake detection. Although 
deepfakes are predominantly recognized as manipulated videos, there 
exist many cases to be produced as manipulated images (Nightingale 
et al., 2017; Yan et al., 2018). Furthermore, the world has witnessed 
cases where deepfakes are mainly manifested in image form, especially 
in scenarios where a brief but impactful disinformation is intended, 
without the need for longer video narratives (Chesney and Citron, 
2019). Such instances underscore the importance of an effective image-
based deepfake detection method. Additionally, the challenge of de-
tecting deepfakes in images is arguably more complex because the 
manipulations or ‘‘injections’’ are harder to be detected accurately in a 
static frame as opposed to a dynamic video sequence. As regards video-
based detection, the manipulations can be more easily exposed due to 
the plethora of frames and the continuity of motion (Thies et al., 2016).
In addition, it is essential to mention that although this work focuses 
on image-based deepfake detection, the proposed framework could be 
easily extended into deepfake videos. This is because the transition 
from image to video essentially involves processing sequences of images 
(frames) and thus our image-based model could be easily applied to 
individual frames of a video, and then the model’s outputs for each 
frame could be aggregated to derive a final prediction. Therefore, if 
a model achieves satisfactory performance in image-based deepfake 
detection, it is reasonable to infer that it would do so in video-based 
detection too.
In this study, we proposed a CNN-based model, DiffConvNet, which 
leverages diffusion processes to detect DeepFake manipulations in im-
ages. The approach is based on the hypothesis that manipulated images 
exhibit distinct diffusion patterns due to their unnatural distributions 
introduced by generative processes. The diffusion mechanism aims to 
expose inconsistencies within the input image, enhancing the CNN’s 
ability to identify DeepFake content. Extensive experimental evalua-
tions demonstrated the effectiveness of this framework, highlighting 
its potential as a promising tool in the field of DeepFake detection. 
In conclusion, the main advantages of the proposed approach are 
summarized as follows:
11


--- PAGE 12 ---

E. Pintelas and I.E. Livieris
Computer Vision and Image Understanding 257 (2025) 104375
• Accuracy: The model demonstrates high performance across a 
wide range of facial image manipulations (refer to Table 3).
• Compatibility & Performance: The approach exhibits adaptability 
with various CNN backbones that also manage to significantly 
improve their performance (see Sections 6.2 and 8).
• Scalability: Our framework can be efficiently scaled to larger and 
more complex architectures (refer to Section 6.2).
• Interpretability: Incorporating diffusion patterns can provide bet-
ter insight into the detection process, allowing for more transpar-
ent and trustworthy DeepFake decision (refer to Section 7).
However, the main disadvantage of our approach lies in the increased 
computation time compared to standard CNN backbones (Table 8), 
particularly when the model has to handle a large number of diffusion 
iterations, such as 𝑁= 50 (Fig. 2). This is a trade-off that our approach 
needs to deal with in order to create an efficient diffusion simulation 
for exposing manipulation content, especially for the very high-quality 
manipulated image cases, such as those depicted in Figs. 3(B) and 3(C), 
which can be considered very hard to detect.
Nevertheless, as with any methodology, our study has limitations 
that warrant further investigation. The full potential of transient diffu-
sion states remains unexplored. While our averaging approach aimed 
to create a robust diffused representation compatible with various 
CNN backbones, more advanced strategies should be considered. For 
instance, integrating CNN-LSTM-based methods (Köpüklü et al., 2022; 
Jain et al., 2020) could capture sequential and dynamic feature corre-
lations across transient diffusion states. Additionally, exploring alterna-
tive diffusion architectures and sampling strategies (Yang et al., 2023), 
may enhance both performance and efficiency.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Emmanuel Pintelas: Writing – original draft, Visualization, Val-
idation, Software, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data 
curation, Conceptualization. Ioannis E. Livieris: Writing – review & 
editing, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Methodology, 
Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to 
influence the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
Agarwal, S., Farid, H., Gu, Y., He, M., Nagano, K., Li, H., 2019. Protecting world leaders 
against deep fakes. In: CVPR Workshops, vol. 1, p. 38.
Bonettini, N., Cannas, E.D., Mandelli, S., Bondi, L., Bestagini, P., Tubaro, S., 2021. Video 
face manipulation detection through ensemble of CNNS. In: 2020 25th International 
Conference on Pattern Recognition. ICPR, IEEE, pp. 5012–5019.
Canziani, A., Paszke, A., Culurciello, E., 2017. An analysis of deep neural network 
models for practical applications. In: ISCAS.
Chesney, B., Citron, D., 2019. Deep fakes: A looming challenge for privacy. Democr. 
Natl. Secur. Calif. L. Rev. 107, 1753.
Chollet, F., 2017. Xception: Deep learning with depthwise separable convolutions. In: 
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 
pp. 1251–1258.
Dolhansky, B., Bitton, J., Pflaum, B., Lu, J., Howes, R., Wang, M., Ferrer, C.C., 2020. 
The deepfake detection challenge (DFDC) dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.07397.
Finner, H., 1993. On a monotonicity problem in step-down multiple test procedures. 
J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 88 (423), 920–923.
Gilboa, G., Osher, S., 2009. Nonlocal operators with applications to image processing. 
Multiscale Model. Simul. 7 (3), 1005–1028.
Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., Courville, A., 2016. Deep Learning. MIT Press.
He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., Sun, J., 2016. Deep residual learning for image recog-
nition. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern 
Recognition. pp. 770–778.
Heo, Y.-J., Choi, Y.-J., Lee, Y.-W., Kim, B.-G., 2021. Deepfake detection scheme based 
on vision transformer and distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.01353.
Hodges Jr., J.L., Lehmann, E.L., 2011. Rank methods for combination of independent 
experiments in analysis of variance. In: Selected Works of E.L. Lehmann. Springer, 
pp. 403–418.
Hsu, C.-C., Zhuang, Y.-X., Lee, C.-Y., 2020. Deep fake image detection based on pairwise 
learning. Appl. Sci. 10 (1), 370.
Huang, J., Wang, X., Du, B., Du, P., Xu, C., 2021. Deepfake MNIST+: a DeepFake 
facial animation dataset. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference 
on Computer Vision. pp. 1973–1982.
Jain, M., Subramanyam, A.V., Denman, S., Sridharan, S., Fookes, C., 2020. LSTM guided 
ensemble correlation filter tracking with appearance model pool. Comput. Vis. 
Image Underst. 195, 102935.
Kag, A., Saligrama, V., 2022. Condensing CNNs with partial differential equations. 
In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern 
Recognition. pp. 610–619.
Kingma, D.P., Ba, J., 2014. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1412.6980.
Kiriakidou, N., Livieris, I.E., Pintelas, P., 2024. Mutual information-based neighbor 
selection method for causal effect estimation. Neural Comput. Appl. 1–15.
Köpüklü, O., Hörmann, S., Herzog, F., Cevikalp, H., Rigoll, G., 2022. Dissected 3D 
CNNs: Temporal skip connections for efficient online video processing. Comput. 
Vis. Image Underst. 215, 103318.
Li, L., Bao, J., Zhang, T., Yang, H., Chen, D., Wen, F., Guo, B., 2020. Face X-ray for 
more general face forgery detection. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference 
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 5001–5010.
Liang, P., Liu, G., Xiong, Z., Fan, H., Zhu, H., Zhang, X., 2023. A facial geometry based 
detection model for face manipulation using CNN-LSTM architecture. Inform. Sci. 
633, 370–383.
Livieris, I.E., Pintelas, E., Kiriakidou, N., Pintelas, P., 2023. Explainable image 
similarity: Integrating siamese networks and grad-CAM. J. Imaging 9 (10), 224.
Loshchilov, I., Hutter, F., 2019. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In: ICLR.
Metzler, R., Jeon, J.-H., Cherstvy, A.G., Barkai, E., 2014. Anomalous diffusion models 
and their properties: non-stationarity, non-ergodicity, and ageing at the centenary 
of single particle tracking. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 16 (44), 24128–24164.
Nightingale, S.J., Wade, K.A., Watson, D.G., 2017. Can people identify original and 
manipulated photos of real-world scenes?  Cogn. Res.: Princ. Implic. 2 (1), 1–21.
Osher, S., Shen, J., 2019. Digitized PDE method for data restoration. In: Handbook of 
Analytic Computational Methods in Applied Mathematics. Chapman and Hall/CRC, 
pp. 751–771.
Pan, Z., Yu, W., Yi, X., Khan, A., Yuan, F., Zheng, Y., 2019. Recent progress on 
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs): A survey. IEEE Access 7, 36322–36333.
Paris, S., Kornprobst, P., Tumblin, J., Durand, F., et al., 2009. Bilateral filtering: Theory 
and applications. Found. Trends® Comput. Graph. Vis. 4 (1), 1–73.
Pintelas, E., Liaskos, M., Livieris, I.E., Kotsiantis, S., Pintelas, P., 2020. Explainable 
machine learning framework for image classification problems: case study on 
glioma cancer prediction. J. Imaging 6 (6), 37.
Pintelas, E., Liaskos, M., Livieris, I.E., Kotsiantis, S., Pintelas, P., 2021. A novel 
explainable image classification framework: Case study on skin cancer and plant 
disease prediction. Neural Comput. Appl. 33 (22), 15171–15189.
Pintelas, E., Livieris, I.E., Kotsiantis, S., Pintelas, P., 2023. A multi-view-CNN framework 
for deep representation learning in image classification. Comput. Vis. Image 
Underst. 232, 103687.
Pintelas, E., Pintelas, P., 2022. A 3D-CAE-CNN model for deep representation learning 
of 3D images. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 113, 104978.
Prasath, V.S., 2017. Image denoising by anisotropic diffusion with inter-scale 
information fusion. Pattern Recognit. Image Anal. 27, 748–753.
Qian, Y., Yin, G., Sheng, L., Chen, Z., Shao, J., 2020. Thinking in frequency: Face 
forgery detection by mining frequency-aware clues. In: European Conference on 
Computer Vision. Springer, pp. 86–103.
Raza, R., Zulfiqar, F., Khan, M.O., Arif, M., Alvi, A., Iftikhar, M.A., Alam, T., 2023. 
Lung-effnet: Lung cancer classification using efficientnet from CT-scan images. Eng. 
Appl. Artif. Intell. 126, 106902.
Rossler, A., Cozzolino, D., Verdoliva, L., Riess, C., Thies, J., Nießner, M., 2019. 
Faceforensics++: Learning to detect manipulated facial images. In: Proceedings of 
the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 1–11.
Ruthotto, L., Haber, E., 2020. Deep neural networks motivated by partial differential 
equations. J. Math. Imaging Vision 62, 352–364.
Selvaraju, R.R., Cogswell, M., Das, A., Vedantam, R., Parikh, D., Batra, D., 2017. 
Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based localization. 
In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 
618–626.
Smith, L.N., 2017. Cyclical learning rates for training neural networks. In: 2017 IEEE 
Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision. WACV, IEEE, pp. 464–472.
Tan, M., Le, Q., 2019. Efficientnet: Rethinking model scaling for convolutional 
neural networks. In: International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, pp. 
6105–6114.
12


--- PAGE 13 ---

E. Pintelas and I.E. Livieris
Computer Vision and Image Understanding 257 (2025) 104375
Thies, J., Zollhofer, M., Stamminger, M., Theobalt, C., Nießner, M., 2016. Face2face: 
Real-time face capture and reenactment of RGB videos. In: Proceedings of the IEEE 
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 2387–2395.
Tolosana, R., Romero-Tapiador, S., Vera-Rodriguez, R., Gonzalez-Sosa, E., Fierrez, J., 
2022. Deepfakes detection across generations: Analysis of facial regions, fusion, and 
performance evaluation. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 110, 104673.
Tsiotsios, C., Petrou, M., 2013. On the choice of the parameters for anisotropic diffusion 
in image processing. Pattern Recognit. 46 (5), 1369–1381.
Weigel, A.V., Simon, B., Tamkun, M.M., Krapf, D., 2011. Ergodic and nonergodic 
processes coexist in the plasma membrane as observed by single-molecule tracking. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 108 (16), 6438–6443.
Xiao, H., Wang, X., Wang, J., Cai, J.-Y., Deng, J.-H., Yan, J.-K., Tang, Y.-D., 2024. Single 
image super-resolution with denoising diffusion GANs. Sci. Rep. 14 (1), 4272.
Yan, Y., Ren, W., Cao, X., 2018. Recolored image detection via a deep discriminative 
model. IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 14 (1), 5–17.
Yang, L., Zhang, Z., Song, Y., Hong, S., Xu, R., Zhao, Y., Zhang, W., Cui, B., Yang, M.-H., 
2023. Diffusion models: A comprehensive survey of methods and applications. ACM 
Comput. Surv. 56 (4), 1–39.
Zhao, H., Zhou, W., Chen, D., Wei, T., Zhang, W., Yu, N., 2021. Multi-attentional 
deepfake detection. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision 
and pattern recognition. pp. 2185–2194.
13
