

--- PAGE 1 ---

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 32, NO. 3, MARCH 2022
1089
Detecting Compressed Deepfake Videos in Social
Networks Using Frame-Temporality Two-Stream
Convolutional Network
Juan Hu
, Xin Liao
, Member, IEEE, Wei Wang
, Member, IEEE, and Zheng Qin
, Member, IEEE
Abstract—The development of technologies that can generate
Deepfake videos is expanding rapidly. These videos are easily
synthesized without leaving obvious traces of manipulation.
Though forensically detection in high-deﬁnition video datasets
has achieved remarkable results, the forensics of compressed
videos is worth further exploring. In fact, compressed videos
are common in social networks, such as videos from Instagram,
Wechat, and Tiktok. Therefore, how to identify compressed
Deepfake videos becomes a fundamental issue. In this paper,
we propose a two-stream method by analyzing the frame-level
and temporality-level of compressed Deepfake videos. Since
the video compression brings lots of redundant information to
frames, the proposed frame-level stream gradually prunes the
network to prevent the model from ﬁtting the compression noise.
Aiming at the problem that the temporal consistency in Deepfake
videos might be ignored, we apply a temporality-level stream
to extract temporal correlation features. When combined with
scores from the two streams, our proposed method performs
better than the state-of-the-art methods in compressed Deepfake
videos detection.
Index Terms—Video forensics, compressed Deepfake videos,
frame-level stream, temporality-level stream.
I. INTRODUCTION
W
ITHIN the past decade, Internet trafﬁc has shifted
dramatically from text pages to multimedia ﬁles [1].
Besides, the emergence of large-scale multimedia social soft-
ware such as Instagram, Tiktok, and WeChat has brought about
great changes in our lives. It can not only enrich the lives
Manuscript received March 3, 2021; accepted April 14, 2021. Date of
publication April 20, 2021; date of current version March 9, 2022. This
work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grant 61972142, Grant 61972395, and Grant 61772191; in
part by the Hunan Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China under
Grant 2020JJ4212; in part by the Key Lab of Information Network Security,
Ministry of Public Security under Grant C20611; and in part by the Science
and Technology Program of Changsha under Grant kq2004021. This article
was recommended by Associate Editor J.-M. Guo. (Corresponding author:
Xin Liao.)
Juan Hu and Zheng Qin are with the College of Computer Science and
Electronic Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, China (e-mail:
hujuan@hnu.edu.cn; zqin@hnu.edu.cn).
Xin Liao is with the College of Computer Science and Electronic Engi-
neering, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, China, and also with the
State Key Laboratory of Information Security, Institute of Information
Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100093, China (e-mail:
xinliao@hnu.edu.cn).
Wei Wang is with the National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute
of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China (e-mail:
wwang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn).
Color versions of one or more ﬁgures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TCSVT.2021.3074259.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TCSVT.2021.3074259
Fig. 1.
The example of an image (right) being forged (left) by using the
technique named DeepFakes.
of people but also make people share their lives in more
convenient ways. With the development of video generation
technology, multimedia data can be used for various purposes.
It makes positive in entertainment, artistic expression, and
social interaction, but poses a threat to political security,
public security, and personal privacy at the same time [2]. The
combination of forgery techniques and AI technology dramat-
ically improves the indistinguishability of digital media [3].
As we can see in the left of Fig. 1, the faces are forged,
and we can hardly see anything unusual with our naked eyes.
What is more, there are fake videos about Obama on the
Internet. These videos show that Obama is altered to say false
statements [4]. With the fake information transmission through
social networks, the inﬂuence of forgery information can be
magniﬁed by 10 million times in an instant. People who view
the fake video of Obama may fall for the video content, which
causes a negative effect on politics. In addition, the appearance
of forgery technology aggravates public distrust and causes a
serious crisis of public trust. It may also result in the disclosure
of personal privacy data, the telecommunications-fraud, and
social justice harm [5].
Nowadays, compressed videos are widely used in social
networks. The reason is that the uncompressed videos take up
a lot of storage, but our device has limited memory. Further-
more, if there is no high network bandwidth, the transmission
speed of high deﬁnition videos will be quite slow. In social
media, when a user uploads a video to Tiktok, the video will
be compressed by the Tiktok. If a user sends a video with
social software such as Wechat and Instagram, the size of the
videos is so restrictive that the users have to compress it and
upload it again. If criminals deliberately spread compressed
fake videos, it will make it difﬁcult for us to detect the
1051-8215 © 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Fengchia University. Downloaded on September 15,2026 at 08:08:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- PAGE 2 ---

1090
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 32, NO. 3, MARCH 2022
forgery video. In order to solve the problem that seeing is
not believing, the forensic of compressed Deepfake videos
becomes an important issue.
In the pioneering work, researchers presented methods for
detecting removing objects in videos [6], copying objects
in videos [7], moving objects in videos [8], interpolating
frames in videos [9], deleting frames in videos [10], fake
bitrate videos [11], and deinterlaced videos [12]. Since the
Deepfake videos generate a face by using artiﬁcial intelli-
gence without leaving obvious traces, their methods cannot
be used for Deepfake videos detection. To detecting Deep-
fake videos, there are some frame-based methods [13]–[15]
for video detection. However, these frame-based detection
methods do not fully expose the characteristics of videos.
The study in [16]–[19] combined temporal information and
spatial information to improve the performance in video
classiﬁcation. Unfortunately, the method in [16] cannot be
utilized to detect the fake videos with normal blink frequency,
and other methods [17]–[19] cannot extract the tampered
artifacts from the compressed Deepfake videos. It is because
compressed Deepfake videos exist some artifacts produced
by compression. These compression artifacts would be mixed
with the artifacts left by tampering.
This paper proposes a method that detects compressed
Deepfake
videos
by
learning
frame-level
features
and
temporality-level features. On the one hand, the compressed
videos add a lot of redundant information to frames such as
compression artifacts. Our frame-level stream can prune the
redundant connections to prevent the invalid connections from
affecting the ﬁnal prediction. Besides, we extract the I-frames
instead of the whole frames of the video, which can reduce
the training efﬁciency. On the other hand, since fake videos
ignore the temporal consistencies during the synthesis process,
the temporality-level stream is utilized to capture temporal
features. The two streams will be trained independently and
then be fused. The main contributions of this paper are as
follows:
1) The frame-level stream extracts the features without
being inﬂuenced by compression artifacts. The temporality-
level stream is utilized to extract the time-dependent features
introduced by the face-swapping process. By utilizing both
frame-level stream and temporality-level stream to train the
detection model, the proposed method detects both tempered
artifacts and the inconsistency between the frames of com-
pressed Deepfake videos.
2) The proposed frame-level stream signiﬁcantly reduces the
scale of training datasets, which may further reduce the time
costs of model training. Speciﬁcally, we utilize the I-frames
instead of the whole frames to train the frame-level stream,
which signiﬁcantly reduces the scale of the training dataset
and thus reduces the training time costs without sacriﬁcing
the detection accuracy.
3) Our proposed method is evaluated over benchmarks of
manipulated facial video detection datasets. Extensive exper-
imental evaluations demonstrate that the proposed method
performs well on Celeb-DF [20] and FaceForensics++ [21]
datasets. Speciﬁcally, our proposed method is robust to the
compression factor.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
illustrates the related works, including 3 aspects: AI-based
video synthesis algorithms, video-based digital media foren-
sics, and Deepfake videos forensics. Section III analy-
sis the compressed Deepfake videos from frame-level and
temporality-level. Section IV presents the details about the
proposed compressed Deepfake videos detection method.
Section V provides the implementation of our method and
assesses our proposed method through a set of experi-
ments. Finally, the conclusion and future works are made in
Section VI.
II. RELATED WORK
In this section, we describe a few conventional and deep
learning techniques for generating Deepfake videos. Next,
the previous related works on video-based digital media foren-
sics and Deepfake videos forensic are introduced as follows.
A. Video Synthesis Algorithms
Previously, realistic videos were generated using detailed
3D computer graphics models. For example, Face2Face [22] is
a graphics-based approach for real-time facial reenactment of
a monocular target video sequence. At run time, the program
uses a dense photometric consistency measure to track facial
expressions of both source and the target video. Then, the faces
of the source sequence are warped to produce an accurate
ﬁt with the target sequence. Finally, the synthesized target
face is rendered to the corresponding video stream. Similar
to Face2Face, FaceSwap [23] is a graphics-based approach
to transfer the face region from a source video to a target
video. First, it extracts the face region by using sparse detected
facial landmarks. Then, using the textures of the input image
to minimize the difference between the projected shape and
the localized landmarks. Finally, the rendered model is blended
with the image, and the color correction is applied. These steps
are performed for all pairs of source and target frames until
one video end. For the Neural Texture [24] synthesis method,
3D reconstruction of images is done in imperfect geometry
conditions and produced at real-time rates.
Recently, the development of new deep learning algorithms
makes the synthesized video more realistic. DeepFakes [25]
sets an encoder and two decoders, puts the extracted faces of
two people into the model, the encoder learns the common
features of the two people, and the two decoders are trained
separately to regenerate the faces of the two people, respec-
tively. Then, supervised learning is used to compare the differ-
ence between input and output, making the difference smaller.
Subsequently, many general works have been proposed based
on the idea of GAN [26]. Liu et al. [27] proposed an unsuper-
vised image-to-image translation framework based on Coupled
GANs, which is the basis for the DeepFakes algorithm. GAN
typically consists of two networks: the generator network and
the discriminator network. The ﬁrst step in building GAN is
to clarify the output and create a training data set for the
generator. Once the generator starts to produce acceptable
output, these videos are input to the discriminator. Then,
let the discriminator distinguish the video. Every time the
discriminator judges that the video clip is false, it will provide
Authorized licensed use limited to: Fengchia University. Downloaded on September 15,2026 at 08:08:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- PAGE 3 ---

HU et al.: DETECTING COMPRESSED DEEPFAKE VIDEOS IN SOCIAL NETWORKS
1091
the generator with a loss. As the generator can generate more
realistic videos, the discriminator will recognize them more
and more accurately. On the contrary, as the discriminator’s
recognition ability increases, the level of the generator to
synthesize fake videos will continue to increase.
B. Video-Based Digital Media Forensics
In recent years, various popular schemes are designed
for video-based digital media forensics. Aloraini et al. [6]
proposed a spatiotemporal ﬁlter based on sequential and patch
analyses to detect object removal forgery. D’Amiano et al. [7]
computed the feature on a spatio-temporal grid and singled
out areas with coherent spatio-temporal displacement as can-
didate copy-moves. For automatic detection of object-based
video forgery, Chen et al. [8] developed an approach for
automatic identiﬁcation and forged segment localization of
object-based forged video encoded with advanced frameworks.
By analyzing the distribution of residual energies within
interpolated frames, Ding et al. [9] observed that there exist
strong correlations between artifact regions and high residual
energies. They proposed a robust motion-compensated frame
interpolation (MCFI) detector to locate interpolated frames.
Feng et al. [10] developed a feature based on frame motion
residuals to identify frame deletion points. What is more,
forgers can create fake bitrate videos by up-converting the
bitrate of original videos with lower video quality to attract
more viewers on video sharing websites. To tackle these
disadvantages, He et al. [11] proposed a detection method for
fake bitrate videos using a hybrid deep-learning network from
recompression error. Besides, Wang and Farid [12] described
two techniques for detecting traces of tampering in deinter-
laced and interlaced video. For deinterlaced video, they quan-
tiﬁed the correlations introduced by the camera or software
deinterlacing algorithms. For interlaced video, they proposed
an efﬁcient way to measure the motion between ﬁelds of
a single frame and across ﬁelds of neighbor frames. How-
ever, these video-based forensics methods cannot be used for
Deepfake videos detection. It is because the Deepfake videos
are generated by the artiﬁcial intelligence method without
removing, copying, moving objects, which makes it can be
quite challenging to detect.
C. Deepfake Videos Forensics
There are also several countermeasures based on frame-
level that have been proposed to detect Deepfake videos.
Typically, Li and Lyu [13] found there are face warping
artifacts in fake videos, and they showed the performance of
Deepfake videos detection by extracting face warping artifacts.
Nguyen et al. [14] used part of the VGG19 network to extract
the latent features and input features into a capsule network
to detect forged images and videos. Afchar et al. [15] started
their experiments with MesoNet, which can focus on the
mesoscopic properties of videos with a low number of layers
and train a neural network in a supervised fashion. While
these techniques show great promise in high-deﬁnition videos,
these frame-based methods ignore the characteristics of videos.
Therefore, their detection accuracy is worth improving.
Fig. 2.
The analysis of the frame-level. In the ﬁrst line, the high deﬁnition
videos are examples showing artifacts from imprecise geometry estimation.
Unlike the teeth of the real face (a), the teeth of the fake face (b) are generated
as a structureless white blob. In the second line, the video is compressed, and
the compression artifacts are generated. Both the teeth of the real face (c) and
fake face (d) are generated as a structureless white blob, which brings a lot
of noise to frame-level features.
In addition to frame-level papers, there are also temporal-
spatial methods. Li et al. [16] detected videos by judging
the blink frequency of the person in the video. If the blink
frequency of a video is lower than normal, the video is deemed
to be fake. However, the continuous development of forgery
techniques based on generative adversarial networks makes
the techniques generate the fake video with normal blink
frequency, which means that the method of blink frequency is
invalid. Moreover, Güera and Delpv [17] proposed a temporal-
aware pipeline to detect Deepfake videos automatically. They
used a convolutional neural network to extract frame-level fea-
tures. These features are then used to train a recurrent neural
network. While the method of Güera and Delpv [17] showed
promising performance, it has its drawback in compressed
Deepfake videos detection. The possible reason is that the
compressed videos bring a lot of compression noise, which
inﬂuences the spatial feature extraction. When the spatial
features with compression noise are input to the network,
it will affect the detection performance.
III. THE ANALYSIS OF COMPRESSED DEEPFAKE VIDEOS
In this section, we analyze the compressed Deepfake videos
from two aspects: frame-level and temporality-level. At the
frame-level, compressed videos mainly increase some artifacts
compared with high deﬁnition videos. At the temporality-level,
temporal inconsistencies between frames would be created
during the process of generating Deepfake videos.
A. The Analysis of Frame-Level
For the uncompressed Deepfake videos, we can spot arti-
facts arising from an imprecise estimation of the under-
lying geometry. Such artifacts are shown in the top row
of Fig. 2. Unlike the real face, the fake face from the
Deepfake videos appears as a single white blob instead
of individual teeth. The difference between real and fake
videos makes the forensics of uncompressed videos relatively
easy.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Fengchia University. Downloaded on September 15,2026 at 08:08:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- PAGE 4 ---

1092
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 32, NO. 3, MARCH 2022
TABLE I
MEASURE THE NOISE LEVEL AND DISTORTION BY CALCULATING THE
VISUAL QUALITY OF THE VIDEOS BEFORE AND AFTER
COMPRESSION. THESE VIDEOS CONTAIN 100 REAL VIDEOS
AND 100 FAKE VIDEOS THAT ARE RANDOMLY SELECTED
FROM FACEFORENSIC++
When the videos are compressed, each frame of the image
sequence is divided into multiple pixel blocks. Since pixel
blocks are processed differently, the correlation between
blocks would be eliminated. This will result in the appearance
of the block boundary compression artifacts. As shown in the
bottom row of Fig. 2, both the compressed real video and
compressed fake video produce compression artifacts, which
adds noise to the data and makes it difﬁcult to detect.
In addition, the application of quantization and inverse
quantization in the compression process will result in quanti-
zation noise and distortion. These factors can also cause visual
artifacts. We use PSNR (Peak Signal to Noise Ratio), SSIM
(Structural Similarity Metric) [28], VIF (Visual Information
Fidelity) [29], RECO (Relative Polar Edge Coherence) [30],
DIQaM-FR (Deep Image Quality Measure for FR-IQA) [31],
and DeepQA (Deep Image Quality Assessment) [32] to mea-
sure noise levels. As shown in Table I, the PSNR and SSIM
between the uncompressed video and the compressed video
are 30.10 dB and 0.89, which means the compression adds
noise information and has a certain distortion. The values
of VIF and RECO indicate that there exists noise in the
visual and edge. DIQaM-FR compares the frames before
and after the compression and measures the distortion of
compressed frames. The value of DIQaM-FR represents that
there is indeed distortion in compressed frames. DeepQA can
generate the perceptual error map as an intermediate result,
which provides us with intuitive analysis of local artifacts for
given distorted images. The value of DeepQA represents that
there are redundant artifacts in compressed frames. Therefore,
we use the convolution neural network with low-complexity
and gradually prune the connections to avoid being inﬂuenced
by redundant information.
B. The Analysis of Temporality-Level
The temporal weakness is inherent to the generation process
of the Deepfake videos itself. As we can see in Fig. 3, face A
is forged to a fake face by using the Deepfake technique. First,
gathering the aligned faces of face A and face B from their
videos respectively. Then, training the encoder to reconstruct
the faces. The decoder will reconstruct a face based on the
facial information in the video. It is worth pointing out that
the face A and face B share the same encoder but use two
different decoders. Once the optimization of the decoder and
encoder is done, any image containing a face of A can be
encoded through this shared encoder. After the forged face A
is generated, these fake images are used to create a Deepfake
video. Because the encoder generates the videos frame by
frame, it is completely unaware of any previously generated
Fig. 3.
The example from FaceForensics [21] shows that the process of
generating fake videos is carried out frame by frame, which makes the tempo-
ral inconsistencies between frames introduced. These video anomalies can be
exploited to detect if a video under analysis is a deepfake manipulation or not.
Fig. 4.
The comparison of the inter-frame correlation between original and
fake videos. Since the temporal correlation between frames is ignored in fake
videos, the correlation of neighbor frames in fake videos is lower than that
of the original videos.
face. This lack of temporal awareness is the source of multiple
anomalies.
Then, we analyze videos by calculating the inter-frame cor-
relation information, which represents the temporal perception
of a video sequence. The inter-frame correlation is represented
by the Hamming distance between the current frame and the
previous frame. The lower the Hamming distance of two
adjacent frames, the stronger the relevancy between them.
We randomly select 100 original videos and 100 fake videos
manipulated by DeepFakes and Face2Face. The results are
shown in Fig. 4. The ordinate represents the reciprocal after
summing the Hamming distances of all adjacent frames in the
video. Thus, the sequence with a higher inter-frame correlation
has a higher ordinate. As expected, it can be found that the
correlation of neighbor frames in the original video is higher
than those of the altered video.
Since the inter-frame correlation of compressed Deepfake
videos is different from that of compressed real videos, it is
essential to extract time-dependent features. The residual fea-
tures of the temporality-level stream are used for detecting
Authorized licensed use limited to: Fengchia University. Downloaded on September 15,2026 at 08:08:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- PAGE 5 ---

HU et al.: DETECTING COMPRESSED DEEPFAKE VIDEOS IN SOCIAL NETWORKS
1093
compressed Deepfake videos. If the residual feature is not a
time-independent feature, the inter-frame correlation feature
cannot be extracted. Then, the temporality-level stream cannot
detect the difference between original and fake video. There-
fore, it is important to prove that the residual features are
time-dependent features.
Let t be the current time, and P be the current P frame.
(x, y) indicates the position of the macroblock in the P frame.
Then, the information of the macroblock in the P frame can
be expressed as:
Pt(x, y) = MVt(x, y) + Rt(x, y)
(1)
where Pt(x, y) represents the information of the macroblock
in the P frame at the current time, MVt(x, y) represents the
motion vector of the macroblock in the P frame at the current
time, Rt(x, y) represents the residual of the macroblock in
the P frame at the current time. Since both the compression
coding standards H.264 and H. 265 employ various sizes of
the coding unit and ﬂexible block partition, we use (x −α, y −
γ ) represents random position coding unit. According to the
macroblock motion vector prediction method, we have:
MVt(x, y) = Pt(x −α, y −γ )
(2)
Combine Eq. (1) and Eq. (2):
Pt(x, y) = Pt(x −α, y −γ ) + Rt(x, y)
= Pt(0, 0) +
x−α

a=0
Rt(a, y) +
y−γ

b=0
Rt(0, b) + Rt(x, y)
(3)
Since the macroblock Pt(0, 0) = 0 at the position of (0, 0),
Eq. (3) can be rewritten as:
Pt(x, y) =
x−α

a=0
Rt(a, y) +
y−γ

b=0
Rt(0, b) + Rt(x, y)
(4)
H.264 and H.265 employ ﬂexible block partition. If the time
domain difference of the current macroblock in P frame is Dt,
we have:
Dt = Pt−β(x′, y′) −Pt(x, y)
(5)
where Pt−β(x′, y′) is the best matching macroblock of the
current macroblock in reference frame Pt−β. Then combine
Eq. (4) and Eq. (5):
Dt =
x′−α

a=0
Rt−β(a, y′) +
y′−γ

b=0
Rt−β(0, b) + Rt−β(x′, y′)
−(
x−α

a=0
Rt(a, y) +
y−γ

b=0
Rt(0, b) + Rt(x, y))
(6)
The Eq. (6) has only two variables, Rt−β and Rt. t −β and
t are variables representing time. Thus, we conclude that the
residual of the macroblock has a strong relationship with the
temporal information. Then, we use the residual features to
capture the inconsistencies between frames.
IV. THE PROPOSED METHOD OF COMPRESSED DEEPFAKE
VIDEOS DETECTION
In this section, we ﬁrstly illustrate an overview of the
proposed method. Then, the details of the frame-level stream
and temporality-level stream are introduced, respectively. Fur-
thermore, we describe the algorithm for the training procedure
and explain the losses of two streams. Finally, the two-stream
score fusion is introduced.
A. Overview of Our Proposed Method
Fig. 5 shows our proposed method of compressed Deepfake
videos detection. The method includes two streams: frame-
level stream and temporality-level stream. The frame-level
stream is a CNN trained with a pruning module to classify
whether the frame is tampered or authentic. First, we construct
the input data by extracting the I-frames from the video,
increasing the data diversity, and cleaning up the interference
data. Next, the data are put to MesoNet [15], which can extract
mesoscopic properties of images. To avoid the model ﬁtting
the compression noise, we prune MesoNet. It consists of three
steps: train connectivity, prune connections, and train weights.
Finally, we get the probability values of labels.
The compressed video contains not only I-frames but also
P-frames. The I-frames are used for the frame-level stream.
The temporality-level stream is trained on time-dependent
features of videos, which are bound up with P-frames. It ﬁrst
cleans the videos to keep the data the same as the frame-level
stream. According to the analysis of Section III, the inter-
frame consistency is ignored when generating the fake video,
and the residual feature is a time-dependent feature. Thus,
the residual features are utilized for the detection of temporal
inconsistency. Next, we use Resnet18 [34] to model the
features. In the end, the model will output the probability
values of positive and negative, respectively. To combine the
two streams, we construct a series of strategies for ﬁnal scores.
Interestingly, we found a simple softmax of scores to work
well (see Section V for details).
B. Frame-Level Stream
As we can see in Section III, the compression brings
artifacts noise to the data. To prevent the model from ﬁtting
the noise in data, we choose a compact mesoscopic network
and prune the network, which can reduce the complexity of
the model and improve the generalization of the model. The
method of the frame-level stream is explained in detail in the
following.
For the frame-level stream S1, the ﬁrst step in our proposed
method is to extract the frames from the compressed videos.
We analyze the compressed videos and ﬁnd the I-frames can
retain the complete information during the encoding process.
The compressed videos lose lots of high-frequency informa-
tion, and we need to input as much information as possible into
the network without affecting the training efﬁciency. Instead
of grabbing images frame by frame, we put the I-frames
into the network. To further enlarge the training diversity,
we cropped the face of the I-frames in multiscale. After
cropping, some images contain only faces, and others include
Authorized licensed use limited to: Fengchia University. Downloaded on September 15,2026 at 08:08:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- PAGE 6 ---

1094
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 32, NO. 3, MARCH 2022
Fig. 5.
The proposed two-stream method for detecting the compressed Deepfake videos. To avoid the model ﬁtting the compression noise, our proposed
frame-level stream uses a compact model with a pruning module. During generating the manipulated faces in Deepfake videos, intra-frame inconsistencies
and temporal inconsistencies between frames are created. Thus, the temporality-level stream is utilized to capture temporal features between frames.
faces and surrounding areas. When cutting the face, there is a
small number of data that is mistaken for the face. We clean
up these interference data to prevent them from affecting the
result.
Next, the faces IF are put into MesoNet [15]. It focuses
on the mesoscopic properties of videos, which are better
than macro and micro features. Indeed, microscopic analyses
cannot be applied in compressed videos where the video loses
lots of information. The macroscopic analyses struggle to
distinguish forged videos where the videos do not leave obvi-
ous visual traces. This network contains four convolutional
layers and two fully-connected layers. Each convolutional
layer uses RELU activation functions followed by a batch
normalization unit and a maximum pooling layer. In this way,
it can regularize the data, reduce the data dimensionality, and
prevent the vanishing gradient effect. We use the kernel size
of 4*4 in the third pooling layer instead of 2*2 for improving
the robustness. We also analyze the impact of the kernel size
in Section V.
Finally, we gradually prune the modiﬁed network. The
quantization noise in the process of video compression results
in a speciﬁc visual error called artifacts. The compressed
videos have a lot of redundant noise, which increases the difﬁ-
culty of detection. To avoid being inﬂuenced by the redundant
artifacts noise, the modiﬁed network is gradually pruned. The
pruning [35] plays an important role in the robustness of the
model. First, pruning the unimportant connections can prevent
the invalid connections from affecting the ﬁnal prediction.
Second, the pruning is an iterative process. Each iteration
is a greedy search so that the classiﬁer will select the most
informative predictors and thus have much less prediction
variance. Third, after pruning the network, the parameters
become sparse, and the network gets a low complexity, which
can reduce over-ﬁtting.
C. Temporality-Level Stream
In addition to model the features of tampered frames,
we also leverage informative clues of temporality for accu-
rate compressed Deepfake videos detection. The compressed
Deepfake videos lose lots of information, and we need to
extract effective features from limited information. According
to the previous analysis of Section III, we know that an
important distinction between real and fake videos is that fake
videos ignore the temporal consistency during the synthesis
process. Since our frame-level stream focuses on the face
region, our proposed temporality-level stream is supposed to
focus on the whole frame for exploiting the temporal features
between frames. Also, the residual is proved to be a temporal
correlation feature. Therefore, the temporality-level stream
utilizes the time-dependent residual features to extract the
inconsistency between the frames and uses the Resnet18 for
classiﬁcation. The details of the temporality-level stream are
explained as follows.
Firstly, we use 3 temporal segments [36] to capture fea-
tures. Three segments mean that the whole video is divided
into three parts. Using temporal segments is beneﬁcial to
Authorized licensed use limited to: Fengchia University. Downloaded on September 15,2026 at 08:08:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- PAGE 7 ---

HU et al.: DETECTING COMPRESSED DEEPFAKE VIDEOS IN SOCIAL NETWORKS
1095
capture long term dependency. Each segment in the video
will produce its preliminary prediction of video detection.
Then, a consensus among the segments will be derived as
the video-level prediction. In the learning process, the scores
of video-level predictions are averaged from those of snippet-
level predictions. We also analyze the impact of the temporal
segments in Section V.
Algorithm 1 The Procedure of Training the Frame-Level
Stream S1 and Temporality-Level Stream S2
Input:
The faces IF
The residual features IR
The learning rate α1 is ﬁxed to 0.0001 for S1
The initial learning rate α2 = 0.001 for S2, decayed by
factor 0.1 every 10 epochs
The batch size b = 8
Output:
Trained frame-level network θS1
Trained temporality-level network θS2
1 while Step < max_steps do
2
for i = 1 →num_iter do
3
gθS1 ←∇θS1( 1
b
b
i=1 L1)
4
gθS2 ←∇θS2( 1
b
b
i=1 L2)
5
θS1 ←θS1 + αS1· Adam(θS1, gθS1)
6
θS2 ←θS2 + αS2· Adam(θS2, gθS2)
7
end for
8
if Step%5 == 0 then
9
θS1.prune()
10
end if
11 end while
Then, we extract the residual features IR from each segment.
As the proof of Section III, the residual is a time-dependent
feature that can be used to expose the inconsistency between
the frames. Therefore, for the temporality-level stream S2,
we extract the residual features IR of the video segments as the
temporality-level feature and input them to the Resnet18. It can
detect the inconsistency between the frames of compressed
Deepfake videos.
D. Training and Losses
A detailed description of the algorithm is given in
Algorithm 1 for training the models. We input the faces IF to
train frame-level stream S1. The target of the classiﬁcation task
is to minimize the loss L1. Furthermore, we apply the pruning
in the model. The residual features IR are input to train the
temporality-level stream S2. The target of the classiﬁcation
task is to minimize the loss L2. The Adam is utilized to
optimize the model. Then, we deﬁne the training losses: L1
and L2.
For the cross entropy loss function, as the error increases,
the gradient of the parameter would be larger, which is
advantageous to converge our detection model. Thus, the cross
entropy loss is applied to train the frame-level stream. The
input of the frame-level stream is I-frames, and these frames
are modeled by the CNN. The target of the classiﬁcation task
is to minimize the loss:
L1 = 1
N

−[yi · log(pi) + (1 −yi) · log(1 −pi)]
(7)
where yi represents the label of the frame and pi is the
probability of positive prediction of frame i.
The input of the temporality-level stream is the resid-
ual features from video segments. Then, the Resnet18 in
the temporality-level stream utilizes the residual features for
classifying the videos. After the formally, the loss for the
Resnet18 network is deﬁned as:
L2 = −log
exp(v[l])

j exp(v[ j])
(8)
where v is the predictive value of the network which has
been transformed into a one-hot encoding, l is the label of
the videos. The j in the denominator represents the index of
categories. Our task has two classes, that is, j = {0, 1}. Thus,
the numerator is the probability of the target category, and the
denominator is the probability of all categories. The greater the
probability of the target category, the smaller the L2. During
hard negative mining, some pseudo negatives will be treated
as true hard negatives, and the model will eventually train the
data to minimize L2.
E. Two-Stream Score Fusion
The classiﬁcation results of videos are acquired from the
two streams. For each stream, the last layer of network output
scores of the labels. The ﬁnal score for a video is obtained by
combining the output scores of the two streams:
r = sof tmax(r1) + sof tmax(r2)
(9)
where r1 represents the output of the frame-level stream, r2
refers to the result of the temporality-level stream, and r is the
ﬁnal result. Since the detection is a binary classiﬁcation task,
the model will output two values that represent the probability
value of the original video and the probability value of the
fake video. Both r1 and r2 are vectors with the dimensions
of 1*2. The sof tmax(r1) is a 1*2 vector that contains two
probability values that represent the probability value of the
original video and the probability value of the fake video,
likewise for sof tmax(r2). The sof tmax(r1) + sof tmax(r2)
represents the corresponding addition of the prediction results
of the two streams. After the addition, two values are obtained.
The two values respectively represent the probability value of
the original video and the probability value of the fake video.
If the probability value of the original video is higher than the
probability value of the fake video, the video is predicted to
be an original video. Otherwise, the video is predicted to be
a fake video.
V. EXPERIMENTS AND DISCUSSIONS
In this section, we introduce the implementation details of
the two streams. Then, evaluating the performance of our
proposed method through a set of experiments and comparing
its performance with state-of-the-art methods.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Fengchia University. Downloaded on September 15,2026 at 08:08:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- PAGE 8 ---

1096
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 32, NO. 3, MARCH 2022
A. Data Preparation
We apply our proposed method on Celeb-DF [20] and
FaceForensics++ [21] datasets. The ﬁnal videos of Celeb-DF
are in MPEG4.0 format. The videos of Faceforensic++ use
the H.264 codec, which is used by social networks or video-
sharing websites. The FaceForensics++ datasets comprise
four types of forgery videos namely: DeepFakes, Face2Face,
FaceSwap, and NeuralTextures. The Celeb-DF datasets are
created by a reﬁned version of the DeepFakes generation
algorithm. Besides, the FaceForensics++ datasets contain
compressed videos with compression factor 40. Then, we com-
press the videos from Celeb-DF datasets with the same com-
pression factor. According to the manipulation types, these
datasets are divided into DeepFakes, FaceSwap, Face2Face,
NeuralTextures, and Celeb-DF datasets.
Frame-Level Stream: For the data preparation of the frame-
level stream, we extract the I-frames by using FFmpeg [37].
Since the datasets only manipulated the face of videos,
we focus on the faces and use dlib [38] to do the face detection,
landmark extraction, and face alignment. When using dlib
to extract human faces, the dlib sometimes treats circular
objects as human faces but does not recognize human faces.
For example, in the video 760_611.mp4 of FaceForensics++,
the dlib mistakenly extracts the circular trafﬁc sign as a face.
When the dlib extracts the circular objects rather than one face
in a single frame, the order of the faces will be scrambled.
Then, the out-of-order frames cannot be used to build the
model of temporality-level. In this case, if the dlib does not
recognize the correct face, we will remove the video. Besides,
we crop two sets of data with a size of 256*256. In the ﬁrst
set, we crop the I-frames leaving only the face area. Then,
cropping the face and its surroundings to form a second set
of data.
Temporality-Level Stream: The temporality-level stream
performs the same data cleaning as the frame-level stream.
Each video is divided into 3 segments. We use CoViAR [33]
to extract residual features from each segment. The dimension
of residual features is 3*224*224. Since the video has 3 seg-
ments, we get residual features with size 3*3*224*224 from
each video. We also analyze the impact of the number of
temporal segments in Section V part D.
B. Model Training
For the FaceForensics++ datasets, each category contains
1000 tampered videos generated from YouTube videos. Thus,
there are a total of 1000 pristine and 4000 forged videos in
FaceForensics++ datasets. 80% of all videos are used for
training the model, and 20% for testing. For the Celeb-DF
datasets, there are 890 original videos in Celeb-DF. To balance
positive and negative samples, 890 fake videos are randomly
selected to carry out the experiments. 80% of these videos are
trained the model, 20% for testing. The two-stream experi-
ments are conducted in PyTorch on NVIDIA Titan Xp.
Frame-Level Stream: The Adam optimizer [39] with 10−3
learning rate is used in the frame-level stream. The pruning
threshold is chosen as a quality parameter multiplied by the
standard deviation of a layer weights. We prune MesoNet
using three steps. Firstly, learning the connectivity by training
TABLE II
THE DETECTION ACCURANCY (%) OF DIFFERENT KERNEL SIZES IN THE
FRAME-LEVEL STREAM ON DETECTING THE COMPRESSED
DEEPFAKE VIDEOS
TABLE III
THE DETECTION ACCURACY (%) OF THE DIFFERENT NUMBERS OF
TEMPORAL SEGMENTS IN THE TEMPORALITY-LEVEL STREAM
ON DETECTING THE COMPRESSED DEEPFAKE VIDEOS
network to learn which connections are important. Secondly,
if the weight is lower than the threshold, we remove the
unimportant connections. Thirdly, we retrain the network
so that the remaining connections can compensate for the
connections that have been removed. Deﬁne the pruning rate
as the remaining connections divided by the total connections.
This pruning process will not stop until the pruning rate con-
verges. Then, the models of DeepFakes, FaceSwap, Face2Face,
NeuralTextures, and Celeb-DF are saved after the training.
Temporality-Level Stream: For the temporality-level stream,
we use temporal segments to capture long term dependency.
Features at each step are the average of features across 3 seg-
ments during training. These features of each segment are put
into Resnet18 to detect videos. During training, the learning
rate is initialized to 10−3, and it is divided by 10 when the
accuracy plateaus.
C. Impacts of the Kernel Size in Frame-Level Stream
Mesonet is utilized in the proposed frame-level stream.
Afchar et al. [15] used Mesonet with a kernel size of 2 ∗2 in
the third pooling layer. To reduce overﬁtting, we change the
kernel size of the third pooling layer into 4∗4. It is important to
evaluate the effect of the kernel size on performance. We apply
our proposed method on DeepFakes, FaceSwap, Face2Face,
NeuralTextures, and Celeb-DF datasets and vary the value of
the kernel size. The results are shown in Table II, and the
performance of detecting the compressed Deepfake videos is
improved after changing the size. When the kernel size is 4*4,
we get the best result. The performance would be decreased
in other kernel sizes. Therefore, we set 4∗4 as the kernel size
of the third pooling layer in our experiments.
D. Impacts of the Number of Temporal Segments in
Temporality-Level Stream
The
temporal
segment
is
utilized
in
the
proposed
temporality-level
stream.
Using
temporal
segments
is
Authorized licensed use limited to: Fengchia University. Downloaded on September 15,2026 at 08:08:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- PAGE 9 ---

HU et al.: DETECTING COMPRESSED DEEPFAKE VIDEOS IN SOCIAL NETWORKS
1097
TABLE IV
THE DETECTION ACCURACY (%) OF FUSION STRATEGIES. s1 IS SET AS THE WEIGHTS OF FRAME-LEVEL STREAM, AND s2 REPRESENTS
THE WEIGHTS OF TEMPORALITY-LEVEL STREAM
TABLE V
THE COMPARISONS OF THE CROSS-COMPRESSION DETECTION ACCURACY (%) WITH THAT OF THE STATE-OF-THE-ART METHODS ON DEEPFAKES,
FACESWAP, FACE2FACE, NEURALTEXTURES, AND CELEB-DF DATASETS. C40-C23 REPRESENTS THAT THE MODEL IS TRAINED ON C40 VIDEOS
AND TESTED ON C23 VIDEOS. C23-C40 REPRESENTS THAT THE MODEL IS TRAINED ON C23 VIDEOS AND TESTED ON C40 VIDEOS
beneﬁcial to capture long term dependency. To analyze the
impact of the number of temporal segments, we vary the
number into 1 segment, 2 segments, 3 segments, 4 segments,
and 5 segments. Then, applying our proposed temporality-
level stream on the different numbers of temporal segments
and showing the results in Table III. It is shown that using
3 segments performs better than that of 1 segment. That is
because that using temporal segments is capable of modeling
long-range temporal structure over the whole video. Further,
when the number of temporal segments is 3, we get the
best result, and the performance would be decreased in other
values. If the number of temporal segments is too large,
the individual segment will be too short. Then, the short
video clip is not conducive to extracting time-related features.
Therefore, we set 3 temporal segments in the temporality-level
stream.
E. Impacts of Fusion Strategies
The outputs of the frame-level stream and temporality-
level stream will have different properties. To combine them,
we tried various fusion strategies, including weighted fusion,
additive fusion, and softmax fusion. The results are as shown
in Table IV. The weighted fusion means giving each stream a
different weight. The results show that the weighted fusion
performs well on DeepFakes datasets. The additive fusion
performs well on FaceSwap and NeuralTextures datasets.
In most cases, softmax fusion gets the best performance by
TABLE VI
ABLATION STUDY - THE DETECTION ACCURACY (%)
OF TWO-STREAM FUSION
using the softmax function to normalize all scores. Therefore,
we use the softmax fusion to detect the compressed Deepfake
videos. It gives us a model that is easy to train and ﬂexible
for inference.
F. Impacts of Compression Factor
In order to evaluate the robustness of the proposed method,
we carry out the cross-compression experiments and show
results in Table V. When we apply the C40 videos for training
but using the C23 videos for testing, the detection accuracy
drops slightly. It is because that the videos with compression
factor C40 may have much more artifacts, which cause the
model cannot ﬁt the C23 videos. If we use C40 videos to
test the model which is trained with C23 videos, it leads to
a slight decline in classiﬁcation performance. The possible
reason is that C40 videos lose lots of information during
Authorized licensed use limited to: Fengchia University. Downloaded on September 15,2026 at 08:08:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- PAGE 10 ---

1098
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 32, NO. 3, MARCH 2022
TABLE VII
ABLATION STUDY - THE FORGERY DETECTION ACCURACY (%) OF MESONET, MESONET-4*4, AND PRUNING MESONET-4*4 ON DEEPFAKES, FACESWAP,
FACE2FACE, NEURALTEXTURES, AND CELEB-DF DATASETS. THE MESONET-4*4 REPRESENTS THAT USING THE KERNEL SIZE OF 4*4 IN THE
THIRD POOLING LAYER
TABLE VIII
ABLATION STUDY - THE FORGERY DETECTION ACCURACY (%) WITH AND WITHOUT DATA AUGMENTATION IN THE TRAINING PROCESS
TABLE IX
THE COMPARISONS OF THE DETECTION ACCURACY (%) WITH THAT OF THE STATE-OF-THE-ART METHODS ON DEEPFAKES, FACESWAP, FACE2FACE,
NEURALTEXTURES, AND CELEB-DF DATASETS
the compression. When the model is trained on C40 and
tested on C23, Rössler et al. [21] performs well on Deep-
Fakes datasets. In other cases, the cross-compression detection
accuracy of the proposed method is higher than other meth-
ods [14], [15], [17]–[19]. That is because our proposed frame-
level stream uses a compact network with iterative pruning to
avoid over-ﬁtting, and the temporality-level extracts the time-
dependent features that are not inﬂuenced by the compression
factor.
G. Ablation Study
To show the performance of each stream separately,
we compare the single stream with our proposed two-stream
method. First, we detect the videos by using a frame-level
stream. The classiﬁcation results of frames are acquired from
the last fully-connected layer of Mesonet. Then, we extend the
results of frames to videos. For example, if the classiﬁcation
results of frames are positive and the frame is extracted from
the real video, we consider the classiﬁcation results to be
correct. The results of the frame-level stream are shown in
the ﬁrst column of Table VI, and the detection accuracy is
lower than our proposed two-stream method. Note that we use
only I-frames as full images, which is a small subset of all
frames, yet the frame-level stream achieves good performance.
Second, we only implement the temporality-level stream to
detect videos. As shown in the second column of Table VI,
the performance is also worse than the combined result.
In the third column of Table VI, we can see that combining
the two streams gets the best result. The fusion of two
streams could reveal both tampering artifacts and temporal
features, contributing to better performance than a single-
stream network. Therefore, the fusions of the two streams
can improve the performance of compressed Deepfake videos
detection.
Then, we perform ablation studies on the MesoNet, mod-
iﬁed MesoNet, and pruning the modiﬁed MesoNet, and the
results are shown in Table VII. It shows that Mesonet without
modifying cannot perform well on the compressed Deepfake
videos. To reduce overﬁtting, we change the kernel size of
the third pooling layer into 4*4. The experimental results
show that there is an advantage to modify Mesonet. To show
the importance of pruning, we evaluate our proposed frame-
level stream before and after pruning modiﬁed MesoNet. The
results are shown in the second line and the third line of
Table VII. It demonstrates that pruning modiﬁed Mesonet
improves the detection accuracy. Since Deepfake videos add
a lot of redundant information to frames, pruning modiﬁed
Mesonet can prune the redundant connections to prevent the
invalid connections from affecting the ﬁnal prediction.
Finally, we perform ablation studies for the beneﬁts of using
data augmentation. Table VIII shows the performance of with
and without data augmentation in the training process. It can
be seen that if we train the model without data augmentation,
the performance would be decreased. Thus, it is signiﬁcant to
do the data augmentation in the training process.
H. Comparisons to State-of-the-Art Methods
In this subsection, we compare the performance of our
proposed method with state-of-the-art methods on detecting
compressed Deepfake videos.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Fengchia University. Downloaded on September 15,2026 at 08:08:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- PAGE 11 ---

HU et al.: DETECTING COMPRESSED DEEPFAKE VIDEOS IN SOCIAL NETWORKS
1099
Fig. 6.
ROC (receiver operating characteristic) curves for the state-of-the-art compressed Deepfake videos detection methods on different public datasets:
(a) DeepFakes, (b) FaceSwap, (c) Face2Face, (d) NeuralTextures, and (e) Celeb-DF datasets.
TABLE X
AUC (AREA UNDER THE CURVE) FOR THE STATE-OF-THE-ART COMPRESSED DEEPFAKE VIDEOS DETECTION METHODS ON DEEPFAKES, FACESWAP,
FACE2FACE, NEURALTEXTURES, AND CELEB-DF DATASETS
We compare the detection accuracy of our works with
that of the frame-based methods and spatiotemporal meth-
ods. As shown in Table IX, when detecting the compressed
videos, our proposed method outperforms Li and Lyu [13],
Nguyen et al. [14], and Afchar et al. [15] on DeepFakes,
FaceSwap, Face2Face, NeuralTextures, and Celeb-DF datasets.
Especially, for Celeb-DF datasets, though most of these
frame-based methods [13]–[15] cannot detect it very well,
the detection accuracy of our proposed method is higher than
theirs. When detecting Deepfake videos, Güera and Delpv [17]
combined spatial and temporal information. Carreira and
Zisserman [18] and Tran et al. [19] classiﬁed the videos by
using 3d convolutional network. Though these spatiotempo-
ral methods can also address the Deepfake videos detection
problem as shown in Table IX, our method performs better
than Güera and Delpv [17], Carreira and Zisserman [18], and
Tran et al. [19] on the compressed Deepfake videos detection.
We evaluate the overall detection performance using the
ROC (receiver operating characteristic) curve, and the results
are shown in Fig. 6. The abscissa values represent the FPR
(False Positive Rate), and the ordinate values represent the
TPR (True Positive Rate). Our curve is closer to the top
left hand corner, representing our proposed method is better
than the state-of-the-art methods on the compressed DeepFake
videos detection.
To evaluate the overall detection performance, we calculate
the AUC (area under the curve) score and show the results
in Table X. The AUC is the area under the ROC (receiver
operating characteristic) curve, and the maximum of the AUC
score is 1. As shown in Table X, the AUC of our proposed
Authorized licensed use limited to: Fengchia University. Downloaded on September 15,2026 at 08:08:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- PAGE 12 ---

1100
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 32, NO. 3, MARCH 2022
Fig. 7.
The visualization of our proposed two-stream method. In the ﬁrst line, we show the Class Activation Maps (CAMs) and heat map of the original
face and the corresponding fake face obtained from the frame-level steam. The second line shows the layer1 and layer4 of original videos and fake videos
obtained from the temporality-level stream.
TABLE XI
THE DETECTION ACCURACY (%) OF THE PROPOSED METHOD ON
CELEB-DF. CELEB-DF_V2′ REPRESENTS THE SELECTED
LARGE AMOUNT OF VIDEOS
method is higher than other methods. These higher results
indicate that our proposed method performs better on the
compressed Deepfake videos detection.
Li and Lyu [13] fed all frames of the video to the CNN
based model and then average the top third of the output score
as the overall output of the video. Nguyen et al. [14] focused
on the frames and used the ﬁrst ten frames of the videos to
detect videos. For our method, we combine the frame-level
stream and temporality-level stream to detect videos, which is
superior to a single stream. Since Afchar et al. [15] trained the
model by using the frames of the entire videos, it may over-ﬁt
during the training of the Deepfake videos. Compressed videos
bring a lot of compression noise, which inﬂuences the spatial
feature extraction of Güera and Delpv [17]. When the spatial
features with compression noise are input to RNN, it will
affect the detection performance of Güera and Delpv [17]. The
methods of Carreira and Zisserman [18] and Tran et al. [19]
focused on the action of the face but ignored artifacts. The
proposed frame-level stream prunes the network to prevent
the model from ﬁtting the compression artifacts, and the
temporality-level stream extracts the inconsistency between
frames. By combing the two streams, the proposed method
performs well on various datasets.
I. Discussions
a) Interpretability of Our Proposed Method: To understand
what visual clues the two streams rely on to detect the
compressed Deepfake videos, we visualize the feature map
in Fig. 7. Following the method used in [40] to generate
Class Activation Maps (CAMs) of the frame-level stream.
As shown in the ﬁrst line of Fig. 7, we can observe the
activation of original-weighted neurons display images with
high probability in faces, while fake-weighted ones display
low probability. That is understandable as Deepfake-generated
faces tend to lack details compared to the background. The
temporality-level stream extracts the proved time-dependent
residual features and inputs the features to the Resnet18.
We visualize the features from layer1 and layer4 of Resnet18.
In the second line of Fig. 7, the faces are the most detailed
part of the real video while it is the background in the forged
video. During generating the manipulated faces in Deepfake
videos, resulting in intra-frame inconsistencies and temporal
inconsistencies between faces. Therefore, the inconsistency
between the faces is exploited by our proposed temporality-
level stream. On the one hand, this visualization indicates that
our frame-level stream can learn reasonable features. On the
other hand, the visualization of the temporality-level stream
shows the different temporal features between the fake video
and the original video. Therefore, our method is useful for
compressed Deepfake videos detection.
b) Testing More Data for Celeb-DF_v2: Celeb-DF_v1
includes
408
real
videos
and
795
synthesized
videos.
Celeb-DF_v2 includes 482 real videos and 4844 synthesized
videos. Thus, there are 890 original videos and 5639 fake
videos in Celeb-DF datasets. All of the real videos are
used for our experiments. To balance positive and negative
samples, 890 fake videos are randomly selected to carry out
the experiments. 80% of these videos are trained the model,
20% for testing, and the results are shown in the ﬁrst line of
Table XI. To fully evaluate the proposed method, we increase
the test amount of Celeb-DF_v2 to 3000 videos. These
3000 videos are preprocessed and cleaned up as described
in Section IV. Then, the trained model is used for testing the
selected videos, and the results are shown in the second line
of Table XI. As we can see from the table, our proposed
Authorized licensed use limited to: Fengchia University. Downloaded on September 15,2026 at 08:08:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- PAGE 13 ---

HU et al.: DETECTING COMPRESSED DEEPFAKE VIDEOS IN SOCIAL NETWORKS
1101
TABLE XII
THE COMPARISONS OF THE AMOUNT OF INPUT FRAMES WITH THAT OF THE STATE-OF-THE-ART METHODS
method performs well on the selected large amount of
videos.
c) Robustness of the Model: There are many algorithms for
generating the Deepfake videos. Finding a common model
to detect video is particularly important. When we use the
model that trained with videos from NeuralTextures to detect
the videos from Deepfakes, the detection accuracy is only
70.56%. Here, the best performance of Li and Lyu [13],
Nguyen et al. [14] and Afchar et al. [15] is 55.82%, 56.25%
and 50.50% on mismatch datasets. The probable cause is that
CNN focused on two classes during training, but the video
features of other datasets are different. Therefore, it is difﬁcult
to accurately detect other datasets without learning them. This
prompts us to focus on improving the generalization of the
model in the next stage.
d) Effectiveness of Our Proposed Method: Suppose a con-
volutional layer have kernels of size kw × kh, the numbers of
input channel and output channel are Cin and Cout, the size
of the output feature map is fw × fh. The multiplication
computation of this convolutional layer is (kw × kh × Cin) ×
fw × fh × Cout, the addition computation is (kw ×kh ×Cin −
1) × fw × fh × Cout, and the bias computation is
fw ×
fh × Cout. Thus, the whole computation (multi-adds) of the
convolutional layer is 2 ×(kw × kh × Cin) × fw × fh × Cout.
According to the above calculation algorithm, we could obtain
the multi-adds of the proposed method. Here, the multi-adds
of the frame-level stream is 55.11 million, and the multi-adds
of the temporality-level stream is 362.81 million. The multi-
adds of Refs. [18], [19] is 222.30 billion and 77.09 billion,
respectively. Moreover, we use only I-frames in the frame-
level stream, which is a small subset of all frames. Table XII
shows that the number of frames we input is much lower than
that of other methods. Thus, the computational complexity of
our proposed method is acceptable.
VI. CONCLUSION
This work focus on compressed Deepfake videos with low-
quality factor to account for situations typically encountered
on social networks. In view of the noise that the compression
brings to the frame, we apply the frame-level stream with
a low complexity network and prune the model to refrain
from ﬁtting the noise. To detect the temporal features of
compressed videos, the temporality-level stream is used to
extract the inconsistency between frames. The two streams
extract the frame-level features and temporality-level features
of compressed videos. We carry out our proposed two-stream
method on DeepFakes, FaceSwap, Face2Face, NeuralTextures,
and Celeb-DF datasets, and the result performs better than
the existing work. Last but not least, the experimental results
of cross-compression detection accuracy show our proposed
method is robust to the compression factor. Future work will
focus on improving the robustness of the model so that we can
identify multiple types of manipulated facial videos by using
a general model.
REFERENCES
[1] H. V. Zhao, W. S. Lin, and K. J. R. Liu, “Behavior modeling and
forensics for multimedia social networks,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag.,
vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 118–139, Jan. 2009.
[2] V. G. Ivanov and Y. R. Ignatovskiy, “Deepfakes: Prospects for political
use and threats to the individual and national security,” RUDN J. Public
Admin., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 379–386, Dec. 2020.
[3] L. Verdoliva, “Media forensics and DeepFakes: An overview,” IEEE
J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 910–932, Aug. 2020.
[4] Deep Fakes: A Looming Crisis for National Security, Democracy
and
Privacy?.
Accessed:
Feb.
4,
2021.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.lawfareblog.com/deep-fakes-looming-crisisnational-
/security-democracy-and-privacy
[5] S. Lyu, “Deepfake detection: Current challenges and next steps,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia Expo Workshops (ICMEW), Jul. 2020,
pp. 1–6.
[6] M. Aloraini, M. Sharifzadeh, and D. Schonfeld, “Sequential and patch
analyses for object removal video forgery detection and localization,”
IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 917–930,
Mar. 2021, doi: 10.1109/TCSVT.2020.2993004.
[7] L. D’Amiano, D. Cozzolino, G. Poggi, and L. Verdoliva, “A PatchMatch-
based dense-ﬁeld algorithm for video copy–move detection and local-
ization,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 29, no. 3,
pp. 669–682, Mar. 2019.
[8] S. Chen, S. Tan, B. Li, and J. Huang, “Automatic detection of object-
based forgery in advanced video,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video
Technol., vol. 26, no. 11, pp. 2138–2151, Nov. 2016.
[9] X. Ding, N. Zhu, L. Li, Y. Li, and G. Yang, “Robust localization of
interpolated frames by motion-compensated frame interpolation based
on an artifact indicated map and tchebichef moments,” IEEE Trans.
Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 29, no. 7, pp. 1893–1906, Jul. 2019.
[10] C. Feng, Z. Xu, S. Jia, W. Zhang, and Y. Xu, “Motion-adaptive frame
deletion detection for digital video forensics,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst.
Video Technol., vol. 27, no. 12, pp. 2543–2554, Dec. 2017.
[11] P. He, H. Li, B. Li, H. Wang, and L. Liu, “Exposing fake bitrate videos
using hybrid deep-learning network from recompression error,” IEEE
Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 30, no. 11, pp. 4034–4049,
Nov. 2020.
[12] W. Wang and H. Farid, “Exposing digital forgeries in interlaced and
deinterlaced video,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 2, no. 3,
pp. 438–449, Sep. 2007.
[13] Y. Li and S. Lyu, “Exposing Deepfake videos by detecting face warping
artifacts,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Work-
shops, vol. 2, pp. 46–52, 2019.
[14] H. H. Nguyen, J. Yamagishi, and I. Echizen, “Capsule-forensics:
Using capsule networks to detect forged images and videos,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), May 2019,
pp. 2307–2311.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Fengchia University. Downloaded on September 15,2026 at 08:08:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- PAGE 14 ---

1102
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 32, NO. 3, MARCH 2022
[15] A. Darius, N. Vincent, Y. Junichi, and E. Isao, “MesoNet: A compact
facial video forgery detection network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop
Inf. Forensics Secur. (WIFS), Dec. 2018, pp. 1–7.
[16] Y. Li, M.-C. Chang, and S. Lyu, “In ictu oculi: Exposing AI created
fake videos by detecting eye blinking,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop
Inf. Forensics Secur. (WIFS), Dec. 2018, pp. 1–7.
[17] D. Guera and E. J. Delp, “Deepfake video detection using recurrent
neural networks,” in Proc. 15th IEEE Int. Conf. Adv. Video Signal Based
Surveill. (AVSS), Nov. 2018, pp. 1–6.
[18] J. Carreira and A. Zisserman, “Quo vadis, action recognition? A new
model and the kinetics dataset,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017, pp. 4724–4733.
[19] D. Tran, L. Bourdev, R. Fergus, L. Torresani, and M. Paluri, “Learning
spatiotemporal features with 3D convolutional networks,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Dec. 2015, pp. 4489–4497.
[20] Y. Li, X. Yang, P. Sun, H. Qi, and S. Lyu, “Celeb-DF: A large-scale
challenging dataset for DeepFake forensics,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 3204–3213.
[21] A. Rossler, D. Cozzolino, L. Verdoliva, C. Riess, J. Thies, and
M. Niessner, “FaceForensics++: Learning to detect manipulated facial
images,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019,
pp. 1–11.
[22] J. Thies, M. Zollhofer, M. Stamminger, C. Theobalt, and M. Niessner,
“Face2Face: Real-time face capture and reenactment of RGB videos,”
in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2016,
pp. 2387–2395.
[23] (2018).
FaceSwap
Github
Non
Ofﬁcial
Project
Based
on
Original Deepfakes Thread. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/
MarekKowalski/FaceSwap/
[24] J. Thies, M. Zollhöfer, and M. Nießner, “Deferred neural rendering:
Image synthesis using neural textures,” ACM Trans. Graph., vol. 38,
no. 4, pp. 1–12, 2019.
[25] (2018).
DeepFakes
Github
Non
Ofﬁcial
Project
Based
on
Original Deepfakes Thread. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/
deepfakes/faceswap
[26] J. Ian Goodfellow et al., “Generative adversarial nets,” in Proc. Conf.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2014, pp. 2672–2680.
[27] M. Liu, T. Breuel, and J. Kautz, “Unsupervised image-to-image trans-
lation networks,” in Proc. Conf. Workshop Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
2017, pp. 700–708.
[28] Z. Wang, E. P. Simoncelli, and A. C. Bovik, “Multiscale structural
similarity for image quality assessment,” in Proc. 37th Asilomar Conf.
Signals, Syst. Comput., vol. 2, 2003, pp. 1398–1402.
[29] H. R. Sheikh and A. C. Bovik, “Image information and visual quality,”
IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 430–444, Feb. 2006.
[30] V. Baroncini, L. Capodiferro, D. Elio Di Claudio, and G. Jacovitti,
“The polar edge coherence: A quasi blind metric for video quality
assessment,” in Proc. 17th Eur. Signal Process. Conf., Aug. 2009,
pp. 564–568.
[31] S. Bosse, D. Maniry, K.-R. Muller, T. Wiegand, and W. Samek,
“Deep neural networks for no-reference and full-reference image quality
assessment,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 206–219,
Jan. 2018.
[32] J. Kim and S. Lee, “Deep learning of human visual sensitivity in
image quality assessment framework,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017, pp. 1969–1977.
[33] C.-Y. Wu, M. Zaheer, H. Hu, R. Manmatha, A. J. Smola, and
P. Krahenbuhl,
“Compressed video action recognition,”
in Proc.
IEEE/CVF
Conf.
Comput.
Vis.
Pattern
Recognit.,
Jun.
2018,
pp. 6026–6035.
[34] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.
[35] H. Song, P. Jeff, T. John, and D. William, “Learning both weights
and connections for efﬁcient neural network,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., 2015, pp. 1135–1143.
[36] L. Wang et al., “Temporal segment networks: Towards good practices
for deep action recognition,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2016,
pp. 20–36.
[37] Y. Cheng, Q. Liu, C. Zhao, X. Zhu, and G. Zhang, “Design and
implementation of mediaplayer based on FFmpeg,” in Software Engi-
neering and Knowledge Engineering: Theory and Practice (Advances in
Intelligent and Soft Computing), vol. 115, Y. Wu, Ed. Berlin, Germany:
Springer.
[38] D. E. King, “Dlib-ml: A machine learning toolkit,” J. Mach. Learn. Res.,
vol. 10, pp. 1755–1758, Dec. 2009.
[39] D.
P.
Kingma
and
J.
Ba,
“Adam:
A
method
for
stochastic
optimization,”
2014,
arXiv:1412.6980.
[Online].
Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980
[40] B. Zhou, A. Khosla, A. Lapedriza, A. Oliva, and A. Torralba, “Learning
deep features for discriminative localization,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 2921–2929.
Juan Hu received the B.S. degree from the College
of Electronic Information Science and Technology,
Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, China,
in 2017, and the M.S. degree from the College
of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering,
Hunan University, Changsha, China, in 2019, where
she is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree. Her cur-
rent research interests include multimedia forensic
and artiﬁcial intelligence.
Xin Liao (Member, IEEE) received the B.E. and
Ph.D. degrees in information security from the
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunica-
tions, Beijing, China, in 2007 and 2012, respectively.
In 2012, he joined Hunan University, Changsha,
China, where he is currently an Associate Professor.
He was a Visiting Scholar with the University of
Maryland, College Park, MD, USA, from 2016 to
2017. His current research interests include multi-
media forensics, watermarking, and steganography.
He is also a Senior Member of the China Computer
Federation and the Chinese Institute of Electronics. He is also a member
of the Technical Committee (TC) on Multimedia Security, the Forensics
of Asia-Paciﬁc Signal and Information Processing Association, the TC on
Computer Forensics of Chinese Institute of Electronics, and the TC on Digital
Forensics and Security of China Society of Image and Graphics.
Wei Wang (Member, IEEE) received the B.Sc.
degree in computer science and technology from
North China Electric Power University, in 2007,
and the Ph.D. degree in pattern recognition from
the Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of
Sciences (CASIA) in 2012. He is currently an
Associate Professor with the National Laboratory
of Pattern Recognition (NLPR), CASIA. His cur-
rent research interests include artiﬁcial intelligence
and its security problem, image/video forensics and
steganalysis, and information content security. He is
also a member of CCF (China Computer Federation) and CSIG (China Society
of Image and Graphics). He is also a member of the Technical Committee (TC)
on Computer Vision of CCF and the TC on Digital Forensics and Security of
CSIG.
Zheng Qin (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree in computer software and theory from
Chongqing University, China, in 2001. From 2010 to
2011, he served as a Visiting Scholar with the
Department of Computer Science, University of
Michigan. He is currently a Professor with the
College of Computer Science and Electronic Engi-
neering, Hunan University, where he serves as the
Vice Dean. He also serves as the Director of the
Hunan Key Laboratory of Big Data Research and
Application and the Vice Director of the Hunan
Engineering Laboratory of Authentication and Data Security. His main inter-
ests are network and data security, privacy, data analytics and applications,
machine learning, and applied cryptography. He is also a member of the China
Computer Federation (CCF).
Authorized licensed use limited to: Fengchia University. Downloaded on September 15,2026 at 08:08:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
