

--- PAGE 1 ---

 
Fused Swish-ReLU Efficient-Net Model for 
Deepfakes Detection 
 
Hafsa Ilyas 
Software Engineering 
Department 
University of Engineering and 
Technology 
Taxila, Pakistan 
hafsailyas97@gmail.com 
 
Ali Javed 
Software Engineering 
Department  
University of Engineering and 
Technology 
Taxila, Pakistan 
ali.javed@uettaxila.edu.pk 
 
Muteb Mohammad Aljasem 
Electrical Engineering 
Department  
Wayne State University 
Detroit, MI, USA 
muteb.aljasem@wayne.edu  
 
Mustafa Alhababi 
Electrical Engineering 
Department  
Wayne State University 
Detroit, MI, USA 
FT7950@wayne.edu 
Abstract—With the rapid development of sophisticated 
deepfakes generation methods, the realism of fake content has 
reached the level where it becomes difficult for human eyes to 
identify such high-quality fake images/videos, thus increasing the 
demand for developing deepfakes detection methods. The 
diversity in deepfakes images/videos in terms of ethnicity, 
illumination condition, skin tone, age, background setting, and 
generation algorithms makes the detection task quite difficult. To 
better address the aforementioned challenges, we present a novel 
Swish-ReLU Efficient-Net (SRE-Net) that is robust to the 
identification of deepfakes generated using different face-swap 
and face-reenactment techniques. More precisely, we fused two 
EfficienNet-b0 models, one with the ReLU and the other with the 
Swish activation function along with layer freezing to achieve 
better detection results. Our SRE-Net attained the average 
accuracy and precision of 96.5% and 97.07% on the 
FaceForensics++ dataset, and 88.41% and 91.28% on the DFDC-
preview dataset. The high detection results demonstrate the 
effectiveness of SRE-Net while detecting the deepfakes generated 
using different manipulation algorithms. 
Keywords—Deepfakes detection, fused Swish-ReLU Efficient-
Net, FaceForensics++, DFDC-preview 
I. INTRODUCTION  
Over the past few years, the generation of fake multimedia 
content including fake images and videos commonly known as 
“Deepfakes” is increasing tremendously. Deepfakes can be 
categorized as face-swap, face-reenactment, lip-syncing, and 
entire face synthesis. Generative adversarial networks and 
autoencoders based deepfakes generation approaches have 
significantly improved the realism and quality of fake content. 
Such realistic deepfakes images/videos are now becoming 
indiscriminate for the human eyes. Additionally, there are many 
open-source software and applications (i.e., FaceSwap Live, 
DeepFace Lab [1], Reface, etc.) that enable the non-tech person 
to create deepfakes in the real world. In this age of information 
technology, where social media platforms like Facebook, 
Twitter, Instagram, Youtube, etc., are the greatest source of 
information, such fake multimedia content can be spread in no 
time and may have a serious social and political impact. 
Deepfakes can be used to fool the face and speech recognition 
systems, tamper the digital evidence, spread false information, 
impersonate and defame renowned personalities and disrupt the 
political processes [2].  
To counter the threats associated with visual deepfakes 
generation, various deep learning-based methods are developed 
in recent years that have attained good performance for 
detecting manipulated images or videos. For instance, Sabir et 
al. [3] introduced the approach that combines face alignment 
with recurrent neural network (RNN) and evaluated it on the 
FaceForensics++ (FF++) dataset. This approach [3] provides 
good detection results for static images but is unable to perform 
better on videos [2]. Similarly, Montserrat et al. [4] introduced 
a pipeline having 3 components: (i) face detection with multi-
task cascaded convolution neural network (MTCNN), (ii) 
feature extraction using convolution neural network (CNN), and 
(iii) prediction using Automatic Face Weighting with gated 
recurrent unit (GRU). The approach [4] was evaluated on 
Deepfake Detection Challenge dataset (DFDC) and the reported 
accuracy was 91.88%. In [5], a five-layered 3D convolutional 
neural network (3DCNN) was presented that learned the spatio-
temporal face features for the detection of facial manipulation. 
3DCNN was only evaluated on FaceSwap, DeepFakes, and 
Face2Face subsets of the FF++ dataset. Two deep learning 
models to detect face swap manipulation from a single image 
based on differences between the face and its context were 
presented in [6]. One of the models was trained on the face and 
the other on the context (e.g., ear, hair, etc.). This approach 
achieved an accuracy of 75% on Celeb-DF and 66% on the 
FF++ dataset. In [7], a convolutional vision transformer (CviT) 
was presented that learned the local and global features of the 
fake and real images using the attention mechanism. CviT was 
evaluated on the FF++ dataset and attained the highest accuracy 
of 93% on the DeepFakes subset. However, CviT is unable to 
provide good detection results for other subsets of the FF++ 
dataset.  
Deepfakes detection is still a challenging task since the 
deepfakes generation techniques are getting improved day by 
day. So, the need for detection methods exists that are able to 
detect the fake multimedia content generated using various 
deepfakes 
generation 
algorithms 
such 
as 
FaceSwap, 
NeuralTextures, FaceShifter, Face2Face, etc. Therefore, in this 
research work, we proposed a novel fused Swish-ReLU 
Efficient-Net (SRE-Net) for the accurate detection of different 
types of deepfakes. The fusion of two models will help to better 
This work was supported by the grant of Punjab Higher Education Commission 
of Pakistan via Award No. (PHEC/ARA/PIRCA/20527/21). 
368
2023 9th International Conference on Automation, Robotics and Applications
978-1-6654-8921-8/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE
2023 9th International Conference on Automation, Robotics and Applications (ICARA) | 978-1-6654-8921-8/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICARA56516.2023.10125801
Authorized licensed use limited to: OREGON STATE UNIV. Downloaded on September 18,2026 at 11:08:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- PAGE 2 ---

capture the distinct features in the fake and real images and 
ultimately helps to improve the detection accuracy.  
The key contributions of our research work are: 
• We propose a novel and robust Swish-ReLU Efficient-
Net that employs a fusion of EfficientNet-b0 with ReLU 
activation and EfficientNet-b0 with Swish activation 
along with layer freezing to reliably detect the deepfakes.   
• Our proposed model is able to detect different types of 
deepfakes including face-swap and face-reenactment 
with challenging conditions of varied manipulation 
techniques, diverse illumination conditions, non-face 
frames, side-posed faces, different skin tones, gender, 
and age. 
• We performed extensive experiments on FF++ and 
DFDC-preview 
datasets 
to 
demonstrate 
the 
effectiveness of our model against the existing 
deepfakes detection methods. 
II. PROPOSED METHODOLOGY 
A. Pre-processing 
In the pre-processing, we extracted the frames from videos 
and then used MTCNN [8] for detecting the faces from each 
frame. According to our model’s requirement, the detected face 
images are then resized to 224×224 resolution having three 
channels. These resized facial frame images are then fed to our 
SRE-Net for the detection of deepfakes. 
B. Architecture of Proposed SRE-Net 
In comparison to the traditional CNN models, EfficientNet 
models proved to be more accurate and have shown good 
performance in transfer learning tasks [9]. The compound 
scaling coefficients used in EfficientNet models allow the 
uniform scaling of depth, width, and resolution. From the 
EfficientNet models, the EfficientNet-b0 version has the lowest 
parameters and floating-point operations [9]. So, based on the 
fastest speed and lowest computational complexity, we utilized 
EfficientNet-b0 in our novel fused SRE-Net for deepfakes 
detection. Our fused model has a total of 8.75 million 
parameters which is less than most of the existing CNN models 
including 
Xception, 
Inception-v3, 
InceptionResent-v2, 
DenseNet, and EfficientNet (b2-b7). EfficientNet-b0 is a robust 
and computationally efficient model based on the linear and 
inverted bottleneck residuals of MobileNet-v2 along with 
squeeze and excitation (SE) blocks. The proposed fused Swish-
ReLU Efficient-Net model is shown in Fig. 1. 
Our proposed fused model includes two pre-trained 
EfficientNet-b0 models named, Model S and Model R. These 
two models are different in terms of the activation function used 
in them. The Model S is composed of EfficientNet-b0 with 
Swish activation function which helps in the strong 
regularization, saturation avoidance, improves optimization, 
robustness, and gradient flow. The Swish activation function 
can be computed as: 
𝑓(𝑥) = 𝑥 × 𝑆𝑖𝑔𝑚𝑜𝑖𝑑 (𝛽𝑥)           
 (1) 
The initial layers of Model S are frozen, which means that 
the model preserves the features of ImageNet and is partially 
trained on our deepfakes datasets. The layer freezing also helps 
in reducing the computation time of the model. Whereas in 
Model R, we introduced the ReLU activation function in 
EfficientNet-b0. ReLU is the fast and simple, widely used 
activation function in CNN models. The gradients of the ReLU 
activation function are not saturated and help to accelerate the 
convergence compared to other activation functions (i.e., Tanh, 
Sigmoid). The ReLU activation function is computed as:  
𝑓(𝑥) = 𝑚𝑎𝑥 (0, 𝑥)           
  
(2) 
The Model R is fully trained on deepfakes datasets used for 
experiments as the layers of the model are not frozen. These two 
models (Model S and Model R) having different activation 
functions are fused using the concatenation method. The models 
fusion help in the extraction of the features that are rich and 
preserve more information thus help in the accurate detection of 
deepfakes. After that, new layers including global average  
pooling, dense, and dropout are integrated into the model. The 
global average pooling layer can better interpret the features 
obtained from the fused model by imposing a connection 
between feature maps and categorization. While the dropout 
layer helps to overcome the overfitting problem. Finally, a 
 
Fig. 1. Architecture Diagram of Swish-ReLU Efficient-Net. 
369
Authorized licensed use limited to: OREGON STATE UNIV. Downloaded on September 18,2026 at 11:08:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- PAGE 3 ---

classification layer with a softmax classifier is employed, which 
computes the cross-entropy loss for the final prediction. 
III. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS 
The performance of the proposed model is evaluated on 
standard, diverse, and challenging FaceForensics++ [10] and 
DFDC-preview [11] datasets. For the performance evaluation, 
standard metrics such as accuracy, precision, and recall are 
computed. 
A. Datasets 
FF++ dataset contains 1000 real videos and five subsets of 
fake videos each comprising 1000 videos. The fake videos are 
generated using the five different deepfakes generation 
algorithms named as DeepFakes, FaceSwap, Face2Face, 
NeuralTextures, and FaceShifter. For the evaluation of our 
proposed model, we split the videos in each folder into training, 
validation, and test sets (720/140/140).  
DFDC-preview is the preview of the challenging DFDC 
dataset. This dataset is composed of real and fake videos of 
actors having different gender, skin tones, ages, varied 
illumination conditions, and background settings. For our 
experimentation, we divided the dataset into two non-
overlapping subsets i.e., training and testing, with a split ratio 
of 80:20. After splitting the datasets, we extracted the frames 
from each video of the datasets for the evaluation of our fused 
SRE-Net. A few samples of FF++ and DFDC-preview datasets 
are shown in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3, respectively. 
B. Performance Evaluation 
To evaluate the performance of SRE-Net on deepfakes 
generated via different algorithms, we designed a five-stage 
binary classification experiment on the FF++ dataset. For this 
purpose, at each stage, we used the 1000 real videos and 1000 
fake videos from one of the fake subsets of the FF++ dataset. 
The videos are splitted into training, validation, and testing sets.   
In the first stage, we evaluated our model on FaceSwap and Real 
subsets of the FF++ dataset. Likewise, in the next four stages, 
we consider the fake videos from the remaining fake subsets 
(DeepFakes, 
Face2Face, 
NeuralTextures, 
FaceShifter) 
 
Fig. 2. FaceForensics++ Dataset. 
 
Fig. 3. DFDC-preview Dataset. 
370
Authorized licensed use limited to: OREGON STATE UNIV. Downloaded on September 18,2026 at 11:08:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- PAGE 4 ---

separately. The performance of the SRE-Net on the FF++ 
dataset is shown in Table I.  
TABLE I.  
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 
Subsets of FF++ 
Dataset 
Accuracy (%) 
Precision (%) 
Recall (%) 
FaceSwap 
98.89 
99.42 
98.36 
DeepFakes 
97.14 
94.62 
99.93 
Face2Face 
98.5 
99.85 
97.14 
NeuralTextures 
92.11 
91.84 
92.43 
FaceShifter 
96.07 
99.62 
92.50 
It is important to note that our proposed model attained the 
highest accuracy reaching 99% on the FaceSwap subset of the 
FF++ dataset. Since the NeuralTextures algorithm introduced 
very few semantic changes and only the mouth region is altered 
while generating fake videos/images whereas the FaceShifter 
algorithm generates challenging fake content via fusing two 
complex GAN’s models. Thus, the detection of fake multimedia 
content generated using NeuralTextures and FaceShifter 
algorithms are quite difficult. Our fused model achieved the 
lowest accuracy of 92.11% on NeuralTextures generated 
deepfakes which is relatively good. The accuracy, precision, 
and recall above 90% on all the subsets of the FF++ dataset 
indicate that our model has the capability to detect deepfakes 
generated using a variety of face-swap and face-reenactment 
manipulation techniques.  
To show the robustness of our model on diverse and 
challenging deepfakes dataset, we evaluated our method on the 
DFDC-preview dataset. After the model is trained on the facial 
frames in the training subset, we tested it on the test set to 
evaluate the performance. Our proposed model attained an 
accuracy of 88.41%, precision of 91.28%, and recall of 94.27% 
on the DFDC-preview dataset. Such good results demonstrate 
that our method is capable of detecting deepfakes in the 
presence of challenging conditions such as the extremely side-
posed face, poor illumination condition, varied skin tones, 
gender, and age. 
C. Comparison with Existing Methods 
To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed SRE-Net 
against existing state-of-the-art methods, we compared the 
results in terms of accuracy on the FF++ and DFDC-preview 
datasets. The comparative analysis for DFDC-preview and 
FF++ is shown in Tables II and III, respectively.  The missing 
numbers in Table III indicate that the results are not provided 
on these subsets of the FF++ dataset by the corresponding 
methods.  
TABLE II.  
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS FOR DFDC- PREVIEW DATASET 
Models 
Accuracy (%) 
FInfer [15] 
80.39 
CNN-LSTM [16] 
81.91 
CWSA net [16] 
85.28 
HCiT [14] 
89.73 
SRE-Net (Proposed) 
88.41 
From Table II, it can be observed that our model attained the 
highest detection accuracy on DFDC-preview dataset except 
from the one model [14]. Detection of deepfakes videos 
included in the DFDC-preview dataset is quite challenging as 
the videos include extremely side-posed faces, poor 
illumination conditions, and realistic fake faces. The detection 
accuracy of SRE-Net is very close to the best-performing model 
[14], which reveals that our proposed model can detect the 
deepfakes of the challenging dataset quite accurately. 
It can be inferred from Table III that our model attained an 
average accuracy gain of 3.14% for DeepFakes subset, 9.95% 
for FaceSwap subset, 12% for Face2Face, 50% for FaceShifter, 
and 22% for NeuralTextures subset. Achieving such good 
results on all subsets of the FF++ dataset is challenging in the 
presence of non-face frames, varying illumination conditions, 
and different deepfakes generation methods. However, our 
method outperforms all the existing methods while detecting 
different kinds of deepfakes included in the FF++ dataset. 
D. Comparison with Deep Learning Models 
To show that our fused SRE-Net performs better than 
existing deep learning models, we conducted an experiment 
where we compared the performance of our model on FF++ 
dataset against the deep learning models including XceptionNet, 
DenseNet, VGG, ResNet50, and Inception-v3. In Table IV, 
comparison results in terms of accuracy are presented.  
TABLE IV.  
COMPARISON WITH EXISTING DEEP LEARNING MODELS 
Deep Learning 
Models 
Accuracy (%) on FF++ 
dataset 
No. of Parameters 
DenseNet 
93 
14.3 M 
Xception 
94 
22.9 M 
VGG 
95 
138.4 M 
Inception-v3 
95.5 
23.9 M 
ResNet 
92 
25.6  M 
SRE-Net (Proposed) 
96.5 
8.75 M 
 
TABLE III.  
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS FOR FF++ DATASET IN TERM OF ACCURACY 
Models 
Subsets of FF++ Dataset 
DeepFakes (%) 
FaceSwap (%) 
Face2Face (%) 
FaceShifter (%) 
NeuralTextures (%) 
Sabir et al. [3] 
96.9 
96.3 
94.35 
-- 
-- 
3DCNN [5] 
91.63 
86.95 
87.85 
-- 
-- 
Khalifa et al.[12] 
93.30 
91.96 
93.75 
-- 
77.10 
CviT [7] 
93 
69 
-- 
46 
60 
Demir et al. [13] 
93.28 
91.62 
59.69 
-- 
57.02 
HCiT [14] 
96 
97.82 
95.85 
-- 
86.29 
SRE-Net (Proposed) 
97.14 
98.89 
98.5 
96.07 
92.11 
 
371
Authorized licensed use limited to: OREGON STATE UNIV. Downloaded on September 18,2026 at 11:08:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- PAGE 5 ---

Table IV shows that SRE-Net attained an average detection 
accuracy of 96.5% which is higher than the comparative deep 
learning models. So comparatively, our fused model has 
achieved the highest deepfakes detection accuracy with a 
smaller number of parameters. The Inception-v3 attained the 
accuracy of 95.5% closer to our SRE-Net but at the expense of 
a greater number of parameters. Thus, from the comparison in 
Table IV, we can conclude that our fused SRE-Net is 
computationally efficient and provides higher accuracy for the 
detection of deepfakes as compared to the existing deep learning 
models. 
IV. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we have proposed a novel fused Swish-ReLU 
Efficient-Net for the detection of deepfakes that is reliable and 
robust to the variation of deepfakes generation algorithms. More 
precisely, our method detects the face-swap and face-
reenactment deepfakes generated via different approaches. Our 
novel fused SRE-Net comprises the fusion of two variants of 
EfficientNet-b0 models having different activation functions. 
The proposed model is evaluated on FaceForensics++ and 
DFDC-preview datasets and shows outstanding detection 
performance irrespective of challenging conditions such as 
deepfakes generated via diverse algorithms having varied 
illumination conditions, skin tones, and non-face frames. Our 
proposed fused SRE-Net not only accurately classifies the 
deepfakes but also shows remarkable detection performance 
against the existing methods. We also compared the detection 
accuracy and number of parameters of our model with existing 
deep learning models. In the future, we will extend our research 
for detecting the deepfakes generated through unseen 
manipulation algorithms and also develop a method that is 
robust towards adversarial attacks while detecting deepfakes. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the grant of Punjab Higher 
Education Commission (PHEC) of Pakistan via Award No. 
(PHEC/ARA/PIRCA/20527/21). 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
I. Perov, D. Gao, N. Chervoniy, K. Liu, S. Marangonda, C. Umé, M. 
Dpfks, C.S. Facenheim, L. RP, J. Jiang, and S. Zhang, “DeepFaceLab: 
Integrated, flexible and extensible face-swapping framework.” arXiv 
preprint arXiv:2005.05535, 2020 
[2] 
M. Masood, M. Nawaz, K. M. Malik, A. Javed, A. Irtaza, and H. J. A. I. 
Malik, "Deepfakes Generation and Detection: State-of-the-art, open 
challenges, countermeasures, and way forward," pp. 1-53, 2022. 
[3] 
E. Sabir, J. Cheng, A. Jaiswal, W. AbdAlmageed, I. Masi, and P. J. I. 
Natarajan, "Recurrent convolutional strategies for face manipulation 
detection in videos," vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 80-87, 2019. 
[4] 
D. M. Montserrat et al., "Deepfakes detection with automatic face 
weighting," in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer 
vision and pattern recognition workshops, 2020, pp. 668-669. 
[5] 
A. Kohli, A. J. M. T. Gupta, and Applications, "Light-weight 3DCNN for 
DeepFakes, FaceSwap and Face2Face facial forgery detection," pp. 1-13, 
2022. 
[6] 
Y. Nirkin, L. Wolf, Y. Keller, T. J. I. T. o. P. A. Hassner, and M. 
Intelligence, "DeepFake detection based on discrepancies between faces 
and their context," 2021. 
[7] 
D. Wodajo and S. J. a. p. a. Atnafu, "Deepfake video detection using 
convolutional vision transformer," 2021. 
[8] 
K. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Z. Li, and Y. J. I. s. p. l. Qiao, "Joint face detection 
and alignment using multitask cascaded convolutional networks," vol. 23, 
no. 10, pp. 1499-1503, 2016. 
[9] 
M. Tan and Q. Le, "Efficientnet: Rethinking model scaling for 
convolutional neural networks," in International conference on machine 
learning, 2019, pp. 6105-6114: PMLR. 
[10] A. Rossler, D. Cozzolino, L. Verdoliva, C. Riess, J. Thies, and M. Nießner, 
"Faceforensics++: Learning to detect manipulated facial images," in 
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer 
vision, 2019, pp. 1-11. 
[11] B. Dolhansky, R. Howes, B. Pflaum, N. Baram, and C. C. J. a. p. a. Ferrer, 
"The deepfake detection challenge (dfdc) preview dataset," 2019. 
[12] A. H. Khalifa, N. A. Zaher, A. S. Abdallah, and M. W. J. I. A. Fakhr, 
"Convolutional Neural Network Based on Diverse Gabor Filters for 
Deepfake Recognition," vol. 10, pp. 22678-22686, 2022. 
[13] I. Demir and U. A. Ciftci, "Where do deep fakes look? synthetic face 
detection via gaze tracking," in ACM Symposium on Eye Tracking 
Research and Applications, 2021, pp. 1-11. 
[14] B. Kaddar, S. A. Fezza, W. Hamidouche, Z. Akhtar, and A. Hadid, "HCiT: 
Deepfake video detection using a hybrid model of CNN features and 
vision transformer," in 2021 International Conference on Visual 
Communications and Image Processing (VCIP), 2021, pp. 1-5: IEEE. 
[15] J. Hu, X. Liao, J. Liang, W. Zhou, and Z. J. I. T. P. A. M. I. Qin, "FInfer: 
Frame Inference-based Deepfake Detection for High-Visual-Quality 
Videos," pp. 1-9, 2022. 
[16] Y. Lu, Y. Liu, J. Fei, Z. J. S. Xia, and C. Networks, "Channel-Wise 
Spatiotemporal Aggregation Technology for Face Video Forensics," vol. 
2021, 2021. 
 
 
372
Authorized licensed use limited to: OREGON STATE UNIV. Downloaded on September 18,2026 at 11:08:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
