

--- PAGE 1 ---

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 35, NO. 6, JUNE 2025
5489
LGDF-Net: Local and Global Feature-Based
Dual-Branch Fusion Networks for
Deepfake Detection
Min Long , Zhenyu Liu, Le-Bing Zhang , and Fei Peng , Member, IEEE
Abstract— With the rapid development of Deepfake technology,
social security is facing great challenges. Although numerous
Deepfake detection algorithms based on traditional CNN frame-
works perform well on specific datasets, they still suffer from
overfitting due to an over-reliance on localized artifact informa-
tion. This limitation leads to degraded detection performance
across diverse datasets. To address this issue, this study proposes
a dual-branch fusion network called LGDF-Net. LGDF-Net uses
a dual-branch structure to process the local artifact features
and global texture features generated by Deepfake separately,
preserving their unique characteristics. Specifically, the local
compression branch utilizes a specially designed local compres-
sion module (LCM) that allows the network to focus more
accurately on key regions of localized artifacts in Deepfake faces.
The global expansion branch enhances the analysis of the global
facial context through a global expansion module (GEM), which
captures image context information and subtle texture features
more comprehensively. Additionally, the proposed multi-scale
feature extraction module (MSFE) delves into image features at
various scales, enriching the extraction of detailed information.
Finally, the multi-level feature fusion strategy (MLFF) improves
the integration of local and global features through multiple
layers, enabling the network to learn the intrinsic connections
between these two types of features. A series of experimental
validations demonstrate that the proposed scheme outperforms
many existing detection networks in terms of accuracy and
generalization ability.
Index Terms— Deepfake detection, dual-branching framework,
multi-scale feature extraction, multi-level feature fusion.
Received
7
November
2024;
revised
31
December
2024;
accepted 11 January 2025. Date of publication 16 January 2025; date
of current version 6 June 2025. This work was supported in part by
Guangzhou
Municipal
Science
and
Technology
Project
under
Grant
2025A03J3122, in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
under Grant 62072055, and in part by the Key Laboratory of Intelligent
Control Technology for Wuling-Mountain Ecological Agriculture under
Grant ZNKZD2024-5. This article was recommended by Associate Editor G.
Xu. (Corresponding authors: Fei Peng; Le-Bing Zhang.)
Min Long is with the School of Electronics and Communication Engineer-
ing, Guangzhou University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510006, China (e-mail:
caslongm@aliyun.com).
Zhenyu Liu is with the School of Computer and Communication Engi-
neering, Changsha University of Science and Technology, Changsha 410114,
China (e-mail: zhenyuliu@stu.csust.edu.cn).
Le-Bing
Zhang
is
with
the
School
of
Computer
and
Artificial
Intelligence,
Huaihua
University,
Huaihua
418000,
China
(e-mail:
zhanglebing@hhtc.edu.cn).
Fei Peng is with the School of Artificial Intelligence, Guangzhou University,
Guangzhou, Guangdong 510006, China (e-mail: eepengf@gmail.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSVT.2025.3530402
I. INTRODUCTION
W
ITH the rapid development of deep learning in image
synthesis, it has brought significant convenience to
various fields. However, its misuse has posed considerable
challenges to society, particularly with the rise of Deepfake.
Advances in GANs [1] and diffusion models [2] have enabled
increasingly sophisticated Deepfake forgeries, including the
manipulation of facial features, expressions, and even the
complete exchange of faces. These fabricated images not
only are realistic but also produce subtle artifacts that are
challenging to detect, and it significantly diminishes the effec-
tiveness of traditional detection techniques. Furthermore, such
deceptive information poses threats to the society when it
is exploited for extortion and political unrest, which leads
to widespread security concerns. Consequently, there is an
urgent need to develop Deepfake detection techniques that
exhibit high accuracy and robust generalization capabilities to
effectively mitigate these potential risks.
Deepfake techniques can be classified into two main cate-
gories: FaceSwap and facial attribute forgery manipulation.
The forgery traces generated by Deepfake are not only
restricted to specific facial regions but may also be dispersed
across the entire face. As shown in Fig. 1, some forgery traces
are primarily concentrated in key facial areas, such as the eyes
and mouth, while other forgery traces are distributed globally
across the face. The artifact traces in key facial regions can
be regarded as local artifact information, while the subtle
unnatural texture changes in the global area are considered as
global texture information. These artifact traces and texture
changes are prevalent in images of fake faces. However,
many existing Deepfake detection methods rely heavily on
local artifacts as the primary detection cues and are typically
built on mainstream backbone networks designed for general
feature extraction [3], [4], [5]. Although these methods achieve
some success in detection, the backbone networks are not
specifically designed for Deepfake detection. They focus more
on extracting image content and neglect the subtle forgery
traces introduced by Deepfakes, leading to poor generalization
when confronted with more advanced forgery techniques.
Inspired by [6], [7], and [8], as Deepfake technology continues
to evolve, the effectiveness of the existing detection methods
will be constrained by these backbone networks. Therefore,
there is an urgent need for the development of network
1051-8215 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Fengchia University. Downloaded on September 15,2026 at 08:09:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- PAGE 2 ---

5490
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 35, NO. 6, JUNE 2025
Fig. 1.
Schematic representation of the forgery traces, yellow boxes marking
the global texture changes produced during the forgery process and red boxes
used to mark the local artifacts produced by the forgery.
architectures specifically designed for Deepfake detection to
more efficiently extract forged facial features.
Current mainstream research primarily focuses on enhanc-
ing the extraction of localized artifact information [9], [10],
[11], [12]. While local artifacts are important cues for
Deepfake detection, over-reliance on them can impair the
generalization ability of the network and ignore other potential
forgery cues in the face. As a result, many studies have
begun to explore Deepfake detection from a new perspective
to reduce dependence on local artifacts. For instance, litera-
ture [13] enhanced generalization by developing the integrated
face analysis network (iFAN), which learns correlations across
multiple facial analysis tasks. Meanwhile, network perfor-
mance is improved by minimizing interference from irrelevant
factors, such as background or identity information [14], [15],
[16]. Additionally, some studies [17], [18], [19] expanded the
scope of forgery cue extraction by exploring global texture
information from often-neglected facial regions, providing
a more comprehensive approach to identify forgery traces.
Although the significance of both local artifact and global
texture is recognized as cues in Deepfake detection [20],
[21], there still have limitations. For instance, a single-branch
network is utilized to simultaneously extract two types of
features with distinct characteristics in [20], which limits the
effectiveness of feature extraction.
Local artifact information is a critical visual feature in Deep-
fake detection, as it effectively captures detailed distortions,
while global texture information helps evaluate the consistency
and naturalness of the image. Compared to the potential
limitations of single-branch architectures in handling complex
forged images, the dual-branch architecture extracts local and
global features separately through independent branches. This
enables a deeper understanding of different types of features
while both local and global information can be flexibly fused.
As a result, the dual-branch architecture can effectively miti-
gate the feature confusion problem and enhance the network’s
detection performance.
Based on the above motivation, LGDF-Net is proposed for
Deepfake detection. To address the distinct characteristics of
local artifacts and global textures, specialized modules—Local
Compression Module (LCM) and Global Expansion Module
(GEM)—are designed, forming the local compression branch
and global expansion branch within the network framework.
This design enhances the network’s sensitivity to both types
of forgery cues. Additionally, a multi-level feature fusion
(MLFF) strategy is introduced to overcome the limitations
of local artifact extraction and the insufficient focus on key
information during global feature extraction. By fusing local
artifact features into global texture features across different
network layers, a powerful joint feature representation is
created. To further improve detection efficiency and accuracy,
a Multi-Scale Feature Extraction (MSFE) module is developed
to enrich feature extraction and mitigate the loss of critical
information.
In summary, the main contributions of this study include:
• A dual-branch framework LGDF-Net comprising LCM
and GEM modules is designed. The dual-branch structure
processes local artifactual cues and global texture informa-
tion separately, facilitating more accurate learning of the
unique features associated with each type. It can achieve
accurate detection of deep artifacts with robust cross-dataset
generalization.
• A multi-scale feature extraction module (MSFE) is cre-
ated to integrate diverse feature information from images.
By employing a multi-branch structure with various types of
feature extraction layers, the module can extract richer detailed
features and enhance the model’s representational capability.
•
A multi-level feature fusion strategy (MLFF) is devel-
oped to strengthen the connection between these two types
of features. The combination of local artifact features and
global texture features are realized in multiple hierarchical
scale, so that the network can acquire the appropriate feature
representation.
II. RELATED WORK
As Deepfake technology uses complex generative models to
create highly realistic fake images and videos, the gap between
the generated images and real facial images is narrowing. The
rapid advancement of this technology poses new challenges
for information security and the detection of fake information.
Currently, Deepfake detection techniques have achieved signif-
icant progress, and they can be classified into the following
three categories based on different detection clues.
A. Detection Based on Local Artifacts
It focuses on facial details and distortions in local fea-
tures, effectively capturing subtle traces of forgery. Early
studies performed Deepfake detection by manually extracting
visual feature differences in images, such as inconsistencies
in head pose [22] or eye blink anomalies [23]. With the
continuous advancement of Deepfake technology, these tra-
ditional methods confront increasing challenges. Deepfake
detection is generally considered as a binary classification
problem and some advanced image classification models
have been utilized for detection, such as VGGNet [3] and
XceptionNet [4]. However, these backbone networks inher-
ited from the image classification task are more concerned
with semantic feature extraction within the image and fail
to adequately consider the critical local subtle artifacts in
Deepfake detection task. Therefore, several studies [24], [25],
[26], [27] have focused on local artifacts prevalent in Deepfake
by enhancing network structure. For example, Zhao et al. [28]
used a multi-attention mechanism to enhance the focus on
local texture and high-level semantic features. Guo et al. [14]
utilized convolution to predict manipulation traces in images
and backpropagation to update the weights, thereby expanding
Authorized licensed use limited to: Fengchia University. Downloaded on September 15,2026 at 08:09:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- PAGE 3 ---

LONG et al.: LGDF-Net: LOCAL AND GLOBAL FEATURE-BASED DUAL-BRANCH FUSION NETWORKS
5491
artifact traces. Tan et al. [29] used a pre-trained CNN model
to convert an image into gradients, and then they are used
to render generalized artifacts. Although these methods have
improved detection accuracy to some extent, the visual feature
differences in generated forgery images are diminishing with
the evolution of Deepfake technology, and the limitations of
an over-reliance on local artifactual cues are emerged.
B. Detection Based on Specific Clues
It analyzes the frequency domain, color space and noise
characteristics of forged images to identify distinctive indica-
tors. Since forged images generated by Deepfake technique
may leave some clues on these aspects, it is possible to
determine whether an image is forged or not. For example,
Liu et al. [15] combined spatial images and phase spectra
to capture the apparent changes generated during the forgery
process. Li et al. [30] built a frequency-aware framework
that enhances interclass differences in the embedding space
to capture the frequency of Deepfake changes from different
inputs. Residual signals from chromaticity components of
multi-color spaces are used as network inputs in [31] to extract
forged common features. In [32], a wavelet scattering network
is used to extract the YCbCr signal from the image color space,
which is converted into a comparison score to predict the final
result by processing the edge discontinuities generated by the
distortions in each color channel. Luo et al. [33] removed
the color texture by image noise to reveal the difference
between the real and manipulated regions. Zhou et al. [34]
designed a two-stream network to capture face manipulation
artifacts and local noise residues. Shiohara and Yamasaki [35]
independently developed a hybrid image dataset by adopting
the synthetic approach in [36], which effectively avoids the
problem of overfitting to a single artifact. These specific cues
enhance the detection capabilities of the network and reduce
reliance on local artifacts. However, they can be corrupted
during image compression, which adversely affecting perfor-
mance.
C. Detection Based on Global Information
It assesses the consistency and naturalness of the overall
image by analyzing global features to determine the authen-
ticity of the face. Although local artifacts are widely regarded
as key detection cues, recent research indicates that changes
in global information should also be considered. Global infor-
mation detection focuses on analyzing overall facial texture
changes and the relationships between localities in image
or video. For example, in [37] and [38], the relationships
between localities are analyzed globally by using Transformer.
After that, these local features are no longer viewed indepen-
dently as in previous studies. Chen et al. [39] learned local
relationships by measuring the similarity between features in
local regions, facilitating a more comprehensive global anal-
ysis of forged generalized features from a novel perspective.
Shaui et al. [40] expanded the Deepfake detection range of
the network by a two-stream network instead of limiting it
to a few dominant detection regions, thereby capturing a
broader array of Deepfake detection cues. Yang et al. [17]
recognized the potential of global texture information to dis-
tinguish texture of forged faces from multiple scales using
centroid difference convolution (CDC) and spatial pyramid
pooling differences. Liu et al. [19] utilized global image
texture features for Deepfake detection to achieve extremely
high accuracy. Meanwhile, studies in [20], [41], and [42]
explored the joint role of global texture information and
local artifact information to improve network performance.
In [20], a multi-classification task-based detection framework
was proposed to expose subtle texture changes induced by
Deepfakes on a global scale and to differentiate between
types of Deepfakes. Meanwhile, Guo et al. [41] conducted
global texture mining while capturing local artifact features
to reveal global subtle texture changes caused by Deepfakes.
Although the above studies have considered the importance
of local artifact information and global texture information in
Deepfake detection, the distinctive characteristics of these two
types of detection signals are not fully exploited. These studies
typically rely on the information extraction modules from
existing image classification networks without incorporating a
dedicated design for detecting Deepfake specific forgery cues.
Furthermore, in terms of fusion between local artifacts and
global texture features, most of these studies usually integrate
them at the final stage of the network using simple operations,
such as concatenation or summation, which limits the full
potential of these features.
In this study, the extraction of local artifacts and global
texture features are optimized through a dual-branch archi-
tecture, allowing the network to comprehensively identify
unnatural facial regions. To preserve feature information into
these two branches as much as possible, MSFE module is
designed to enhance detail extraction and minimize informa-
tion loss. Subsequently, through MLFF, it effectively mines
and learns robust representations of these feature type. It not
only addresses the limitations of prior studies but also offers
a more effective solution for Deepfake detection, promoting
further advancements in this field.
III. PROPOSED SCHEME
The overview of LGDF-Net is shown in Fig.2. It utilizes
a dual-branch architecture combined with MSFE module and
MLFF strategy to enhance the network’s accuracy and gen-
eralization ability. Targeted extraction of local artifact and
global texture features is performed through local compres-
sion and global expansion branches, preserving their unique
characteristics. Additionally, the MSFE module extracts image
features from multiple perspectives, providing rich details for
subsequent network learning. The MLFF strategy aggregates
local artifact and global texture information at different levels,
adjusts the network’s attention to these feature types and
continuously optimizes their representation. The multi-scale
feature extraction module, local compression branch, global
expansion branch, and multi-level feature fusion strategy are
elaborated in the following.
A. Multi-Scale Feature Extraction Module
To compensate for the information loss caused by traditional
CNNs during feature extraction and to enrich the diversity of
Authorized licensed use limited to: Fengchia University. Downloaded on September 15,2026 at 08:09:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- PAGE 4 ---

5492
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 35, NO. 6, JUNE 2025
Fig. 2.
The general framework of LGDF-Net. This dual-stream network consists of three main modules, MSFE, LCM, and GEM. The details of each module
are shown in Fig.
learned feature types, a multi-scale feature extraction (MSFE)
module is designed. This module consists of a convolutional
branch, a max pooling branch, and an attention branch, and the
attention branch is based on the self-attention mechanism [43].
Each branch provides distinct spatial and semantic represen-
tations. By aggregating these varied representations, the detail
loss associated with standard convolution can be minimized.
This enables the network to learn finer details and richer
facial profile information, significantly enhancing the clarity
and resolution of the feature maps extracted by the network.
The MSFE module consists of three main parallel branches,
and each of which contains two key components. The first
of which is a feature extraction layer for different image
information, consisting of a 7 × 7 convolutional with stride of
2 and padding of 3, a 3 × 3 max pooling with stride of 2 and
padding of 1, and a self-attention module, respectively. The
second part of the multi-layer perceptron (MLP) is responsible
for processing different types of features extracted from each
feature extraction layer separately. As shown in Fig.2, for
the input image, it first extracts the preliminary feature map
T (x) ∈RC×H×W by 7 × 7 convolutional layer and then
input it to the MSFE module for depth processing. In the
MSFE module, the feature maps T (x) are first normalized
by a normalization layer, which are randomly initialized as
learnable parameters. These parameters are updated during
training to adapt to the intrinsic distribution of the data, pro-
viding a canonical and stable input benchmark for subsequent
operations. Subsequently, these processed features are fed into
the three branches corresponding to the convolutional, max
pooling, and attention layers, and the pixel-to-pixel interac-
tions are performed in their respective MLP to obtain the
higher-level abstract feature mappings Ti(x), i ∈{1, 2, 3}.
Here, T1(x), T2(x), and T3(x) represent the output features
of the convolutional, max pooling, and the attention branches,
with channel numbers of 64, 32, and 32, respectively. σ(·)
denotes the multi-layer perceptron. FC(x), FM(x), FA(x)
represent the convolutional layer, the max pooling layer and
the attention layer, respectively. The operation flow of each
branch is shown by
Ti(x) = σ(Fj(T (x))), i = 1, 2, 3, j = C, M, A
(1)
After processing and optimization in each branch, the feature
mappings T1, T2, T3 are up-sampled to achieve uniformity
in dimension. Subsequently, these features are spliced in the
channel dimension to achieve effective fusion of the image
detail information. Finally, the output feature is completed by
a convolutional layer with a kernel of 1 × 1, stride of 1, and
padding of 0, which is represented by
F(x) = Conv1×1(T1 + T2 + T3),
(2)
where F(x) denotes the output of the MSFE module, Convi(·)
denotes the convolution operation. The subscript i denotes
the size of the corresponding convolutional kernel. The opti-
mized feature F(x) output by the multi-dimensional feature
extraction module will provide key support for the subsequent
dual-branch Deepfake detection task to ensure the accuracy of
the detection.
Fig.3 shows the visualization of the image features extracted
by each branch in the MSFE module. It can be found that
the features extracted by different branches present significant
differences. Specifically, the convolutional branch focuses on
the extraction of shallow features, so the extracted shallow
Authorized licensed use limited to: Fengchia University. Downloaded on September 15,2026 at 08:09:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- PAGE 5 ---

LONG et al.: LGDF-Net: LOCAL AND GLOBAL FEATURE-BASED DUAL-BRANCH FUSION NETWORKS
5493
Fig. 3.
Visualized feature maps extracted using each branch of MSFE,
(a) ∼(d) correspond to the output of feature maps on different channels.
Fig. 4.
Visualized feature maps extracted using standard convolution,
(a) ∼(d) correspond to the output of the feature maps on different channels.
information of the image is richer, as shown in Fig.3 (b)∼(d).
The maximum pooling branch focuses on capturing significant
artifacts in the image, so the eyes, mouth, and facial contour
parts of the face are more sensitive, as shown in Fig.3 (a)∼(c).
The attention branch is dedicated to capturing key feature
information from each local region of the face, and it pays
more attention to the key features in each local region of the
face, instead of limiting itself to the five facial features, so the
deficiencies of the max-pooling branch is enhanced, as shown
in Fig.3 (c)∼(d).
Additionally, Fig.4 and Fig.5 display the visualized feature
maps extracted by standard convolution layers and MSFE
modules, respectively. It can be found that the feature infor-
mation extracted by standard convolution is relatively limited,
which indicates a restricted ability to capture important facial
details and accurately identify local key information and facial
contours, as shown in Fig.4(a)∼(d). In contrast, the feature
maps extracted by the MSFE module exhibit richer and more
detailed facial features, as illustrated in Fig.5(a)∼(d). This
improvement is attributed to the MSFE module’s capability
to enhance image information extraction and reduce the inter-
ference of irrelevant information by aggregating multiple types
of features through its multiple branches.
Fig. 5.
Visualized feature maps extracted using MSFE, (a) ∼(d) correspond
to the output of feature maps on different channels.
B. Local Compression Branch
In the Deepfake detection task, local artifact features serve
as crucial detection cues. To enhance the network’s ability to
model local artifact features in the forged image, the network’s
attention is concentrated on key local artifact regions to mini-
mize the interference of irrelevant information. To achieve this,
a local compression module (LCM) that combines the residual
structure [5] with the bottleneck structure [44] is designed.
Local compression branch is formed by cascading LCM
modules. In the LCM, the number of channels in the convo-
lution is modified through dimensionality reduction followed
by dimensionality enhancement, which helps to control the
network’s extraction space in regions with a high concentration
of forged artifacts. It reduces the risk of propagating irrelevant
redundant information within the network, compresses the
sensory field without introducing additional parameters and
avoids the computational complexity associated with excessive
network depth.
The LCM module consists of an inverse bottleneck struc-
ture, a residual structure, and a SE attention module [45],
as shown in Fig.2. The inverse bottleneck structure consists of
three convolutional layers using 1 × 1, 3 × 3, and 1 × 1 con-
volutional kernels, all with stride of 1, and padding 0, 1, 0,
respectively. The residual structure consists of a max pooling
layer and a convolutional layer using 1 × 1 and 3 × 3 con-
volutional kernels, all with stride of 1, and padding of 0, 1,
respectively. The SE attention module is responsible for the
weighting of the feature channels with respect to their impor-
tance in order to highlight important features. Taking F(x) as
the input to the LCM module, the compression and expansion
of the input feature channel is first realized by a sequence
of convolutional layers with an inverse bottleneck structure.
Then, the SE attention module adjusts the weights of the
compressed and expanded features to get the final output, and
the whole process can be expressed as
FSE = SE(Conv1×1(Conv3×3(Conv1×1(F(x))))),
(3)
where FSE(x) denotes the output features processed by the
SE attention mechanism, SE(·) represents the SE attention
Authorized licensed use limited to: Fengchia University. Downloaded on September 15,2026 at 08:09:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- PAGE 6 ---

5494
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 35, NO. 6, JUNE 2025
Fig. 6.
Grad-CAM mapping diagrams for the LCM module under four
forgery types in FaceForensics++.
mechanism, and Convi(·) denotes the convolution operation.
The subscript i denotes the size of the corresponding con-
volutional kernel. To compensate for the loss of information,
the residual output Fr(x) is obtained by residual structuring
the original input features F(x) through 3 × 3 convolution
and 1 × 1 max pooling, which is denoted by
Fr(x) = Conv3×3(PMax(F(x))),
(4)
where PMax(·) denotes the max pooling layer. Finally, FSE
is combined with Fr obtained via the residual structure to
supplement the detail information to obtain the final output of
the LCM FL(x), which can be expressed as
FL(x) = FSE(x) + Fr(x).
(5)
Throughout the local compression branch, the input features
will be processed by a cascade of four LCM modules to refine
the capture of local regions of the facial image. The LCM
module is able to focus on facial features in different localized
regions to ensure that the final output has higher discriminative
power, which further improves the detection performance of
the entire network.
The Grad-CAM in Fig.6 shows the focus of the LCM
module’s attention on each region in the face image. It can
be seen that the LCM focuses its attention on the local-
ized five-feature parts where artifacts frequently appear in
Face2Face and NeuralTextures, while the LCM focuses its
attention on the facial distortion traces caused by the artifacts,
as well as the irregular contours of the face in Deepfake and
FaceSwap. This also verifies that the designed LCM module
is effective in forcing the model to capture the local artifactual
cues of the face in a more compact feature space by reducing
the number of channels, and then further assigning weights
to the extracted features to get the key features through the
SE module. Therefore, the local compression branch using the
LCM module can effectively highlight the key Deepfake cues,
enhance the sensitivity of the network to these forged features,
and further improve the model performance.
C. Global Expansion Branch
Subtle texture changes are typically randomly distributed
across various regions of the face. By expanding the network’s
search range, these facial texture changes can be captured
comprehensively, and the limitations of the local extraction
process can be addressed. Furthermore, the feature informa-
tion obtained from the global search aids the network in
accurately targeting camouflage regions, thereby enhancing
detection accuracy. To facilitate this, a global expansion mod-
ule (GEM) is designed based on the residuals and inverted
bottleneck structure [44] to constitute the global expansion
branch. By increasing the number of channels to enhance
the perceptual domain of feature extraction, the network can
better understand the overall structure of the face through
contextual information, and the ability to capture subtle global
texture changes. Additionally, to further enhance the learning
capability of the global expansion branch, the features output
from the local and global branches of the previous layer are
optimally fused as inputs to the GEM module.
The GEM module contains two standard convolutions with
kernel of 1 × 1 and two kernels of 3 × 3, which are
corresponded to strides 1 and 2 with padding 0 and 1,
and max pooling layer with kernel 3 × 3, stride 2, and
padding 1, as shown in Fig.2. F(x) is taken as the input to
the GEM module, where F(x) is first dimensionally scaled
by 1 × 1 and 3 × 3 convolutional layers. During this
dimensionality adjustment process, the number of channels is
increased and then decreased to increase the network sensory
field for deeper understanding of the contextual information.
It can be represented as
F1(x) = Conv3×3(Conv1×1(F(x))),
(6)
where F1(x) denotes the dimensionally adjusted output fea-
ture. F1(x) is combined with PMax(F(x)), which is restored
to the original number of channels by a 1 × 1 convolution
operation, and the enhancement feature F2(x) to finally obtain
the output FG(x). Specifically, it can be expressed by
F2(x) = Conv3×3(F(x)),
(7)
FG(x) = Conv1×1(F1(x) + PMax(F(x))) + F2(x).
(8)
In the global expansion branch, the input information is
optimized by using the GEM module to reduce the width and
height of the input feature map, which helps to focus on a
wider range of pixel, thus reducing unwanted local noise. This
process can be represented by
FGi(x) = GE Mi−1(F′
i−1(x)), i = 2, 3, 4, 5.
(9)
where F′
i (i = 1, 2, 3, 4) denote the optimized features inputted
into the GEM module, and FGj( j = 2, 3, 4, 5) are the output
features obtained by the GEM. Their sizes are 128 × 38 × 38,
256×19×19, 512×10×10 and 1024×5×5, respectively. The
global expansion branch digs deeper into the high-level texture
information in the image features by cascading GEM modules
and effectively extracts the global subtle texture changes.
Fig.7 shows the global texture information extracted by
the GEM module from authentic faces and various types
of counterfeit faces. The GEM can effectively extract fine
Authorized licensed use limited to: Fengchia University. Downloaded on September 15,2026 at 08:09:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- PAGE 7 ---

LONG et al.: LGDF-Net: LOCAL AND GLOBAL FEATURE-BASED DUAL-BRANCH FUSION NETWORKS
5495
Fig. 7. Global texture extraction of real faces, (a) ∼(d)are visualized feature
maps extracted by the global bottleneck module.
facial contours in both real and fake faces, and preserve
sensory information while also retain rich texture details from
non-critical facial regions, as depicted in Fig.7(c)∼(d). This
effect is mainly due to the fact that the GEM expands the
number of channels based on the bottleneck structure, and it
enhances the network’s receptive field and its ability to capture
intricate features. Additionally, the incorporation of residual
structures in the GEM facilitates information supplementation,
thereby deepening contextual learning.
D. Multi-Level Feature Fusion Strategy
In contrast to the traditional approach that simply splices
local artifacts and global texture at the end of the network,
a multi-level feature fusion strategy (MLFF) that learns the
abstract features of these two types of cues at various levels
is proposed. This strategy adjusts the network’s attention
allocation to different feature types, thereby providing a more
discriminative feature representation.
As shown in Fig.2, the MLFF strategy first processes the
output FL1 from the first layer of the local branch using
a 1 × 1 convolution with a stride of 1 and padding of 0.
This output is then combined with the output FG1 from the
first layer of the global branch to yield F′
1, which is sent to
the second layer of the global branch to produce the output
feature FG2. Secondly, the output FL2 from the second layer of
the local branch is processed with a 3 × 3 convolutional layer
with a stride of 2 and padding of 1, and then its size is reduced
to half of the original. Then, it is combined FG2 to generate
F′
2, which is fed into the third layer of the global branch to
obtain FG3. The output FL3 from the third layer of the local
branch undergoes processing through two 3 × 3 convolutional
layers with a stride of 2 and padding of 1, so its feature map
size is reduced to one-fourth of the original. It is combined
with FG3 to produce F′
3, which serves as the input for the
fourth layer of the global branch. Finally, the output FL4
from the fourth layer of the local branch is processed using
three 3 × 3 convolutional layers with a stride of 2 and a
padding of 1, and its size is reduced to one-eighth of the
original. This output is combined with FG4, which is the
output from the fourth layer of the global branch, to obtain
F′
4. Finally, it is input into the fifth layer of the global branch
for the final output.
The fusion strategy eliminates the impact of unnecessary
noise by reducing the size of the feature maps, thereby enhanc-
ing the focus on local features. Furthermore, by integrating
local artifact features with global texture features, forgery cues
in the manipulated face can be extracted more accurately and
comprehensively.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
A. Datasets
Here, three mainstream datasets FF++ [46], DFDC [47],
and Celeb-DF [48] are chosen for experimental evaluation.
Since all three datasets are video datasets, it is necessary
to perform preprocessing on them. Firstly, the face locations
in the video frames are marked using the face recognition
library MTCNN, and then these coordinates corresponding
to faces are cropped using the CV2 library. After that, the
extracted face images are resized to 299 × 299 for evaluation.
Considering the inconsistency in the number of real and fake
videos in the dataset, the number of extracted frames has been
adjusted accordingly for different datasets.
FF++ [46] consists of 1,000 real videos and 4,000 fake
videos generated by four typical face forgery methods, includ-
ing Deepfake, Face2Face, FaceSwap, and NeuralTextures.
Three versions are included in FF++: the original dataset,
the compressed high-quality dataset FF ++ (HQ), and the
compressed low dataset FF++ (LQ). To better detect the
performance of the model, the more challenging FF++ (HQ)
and FF++ (LQ) datasets are experimentally chosen.
DFDC [47] is a large-scale fake face video database
developed for Deepfake Detection Challenge, and it contains
1131 real videos and 4119 fake videos. Various advanced
Deepfake techniques, and the real videos are shot in different
real-life scenarios and have partially faked Deepfake faces.
Celeb-DF [48] contains 590 real videos and 5639 fake
videos, and it is a currently popular database of high-quality
face fakes. By improving the Deepfake method, the visual
artifacts presented in the video is reduced. The generated
realistic faces make Deepfake detection very challenging, and
they are commonly used to evaluate the generalization ability
of the model.
B. Experiment Settings
1) Evaluation Metrics: To comprehensively evaluate the
performance of the methods, accuracy (ACC) and area under
the curve (AUC) are used as the main evaluation criteria to
evaluate performance. ACC represents the percentage of real
versus fake images correctly recognized by the classification
network, while the AUC metric is the overall quality of the
model prediction results, and it reflects the model discrim-
inative power. With these two metrics, it is able to make
an objective evaluation of the method performance on the
Deepfake detection task.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Fengchia University. Downloaded on September 15,2026 at 08:09:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- PAGE 8 ---

5496
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 35, NO. 6, JUNE 2025
TABLE I
DEEPFAKE DETECTION COMPARISON RESULTS FOR INTRA-DATASET EVALUATION
2) Implementation Details: Given that the sizes and shapes
of actual faces vary in different video datasets, to ensure the
consistency of the input data, MTCNN is used to detect faces
in the video dataset, and the faces used in the experiments
are cropped to 299×299. In addition, several commonly used
data enhancement techniques are introduced to improve the
generalization ability of the model. In the training phase, SGD
optimizer with default parameters and an initial learning rate
of 0.001 is chosen. The learning rate is set to decay to 50 of the
original every 5 epochs. All experiments were implemented in
the PyTorch framework through NVIDIA RTX 3090 24GB.
C. Experimental Results
1) Intra-Dataset Performance: To achieve an objective and
fair comparison, MesoIncep [24], XceptionNet [4], F3Net [49],
MAT [28], Recce [50], M2TR [51], GocNet [52], SFDG [53],
LDF-Net [41] are chosen for comparison, and the experimental
results are kept under the same experimental conditions for
the selected methods trained from scratch on the same dataset
and validated using the same test set. The results are listed in
TABLE I.
It can be found that the methods detection accuracy in the
FF++ dataset is degraded compared to DFDC and Celeb-
DF. This is attributed to the richer face samples and the
variety of forgeries available in FF++. However, it can be
observed that the proposed scheme achieves high accuracy
in Celeb-DF and DFDC, and it indicates that the proposed
scheme can adequately learn the spatial features of the forged
images. In both versions of the FF++ dataset, LGDF-Net
still shows excellent performance, especially in the challenging
(LQ) version, and it achieves the optimal results in terms of
both ACC and AUC compared to other methods. Despite the
fact that F3Net reaches the highest ACC on FF++ (HQ), our
proposed framework still achieves good results. Meanwhile,
LGDF-Net exceeds it on FF++ (LQ), and this is because
the over-compression destroys the frequency cues utilized by
F3Net. In contrast, LGDF-Net fully learns the local artifacts
and global texture information in the forged face, which
complement each other and preserve the forged cues after
compression. Thus, the generalization and anti-interference
ability of the method are improved.
TABLE II
DEEPFAKE DETECTION COMPARISON RESULTS
FOR CROSS-DATASET EVALUATION
From the experimental results, it demonstrates the feasibility
of LGDF-Net in coping with different forgeries, and significant
performance improvement is achieved. This improvement is
mainly attributed to the deep analysis and precise refinement
of two key cues, local artifacts features and global texture
information, by using the dual-branch structure. In this way,
it ensures that the unique properties of these cues are effec-
tively maintained and exploited.
2) Cross-Dataset Performance: To evaluate the applica-
bility of LGDF-Net in real-world scenarios, cross-dataset
testing is performed to assess its generalization capability
on unseen forged data. Specifically, the network is trained
on the FF++ (HQ) dataset and then the trained network
is tested on the Celeb-DF dataset, the results are listed in
TABLE II. Additionally, a series of cross-dataset tests are
conducted on the four FF++ (LQ) subsets to further assess
its generalization ability across various generation techniques.
The corresponding results are presented in TABLE III.
As seen from TABLE II, LGDF-Net demonstrates strong
generalization performance on the Celeb-DF dataset, the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Fengchia University. Downloaded on September 15,2026 at 08:09:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- PAGE 9 ---

LONG et al.: LGDF-Net: LOCAL AND GLOBAL FEATURE-BASED DUAL-BRANCH FUSION NETWORKS
5497
TABLE III
CROSS-DATASET EVALUATION RESULTS ON THE FF++ (LQ) DATASET
accuracy
reaches
67.14%,
which
exceeds
Recce
with
1.03%. In addition, LGDF-Net also excels in AUC. This
mainly benefits from the dual-branch architecture of the
LGDF-Net framework, which is specifically designed to effec-
tively extract both local artifact features and global texture
features. Furthermore, the MLFF strategy enhances the feature
representation through multi-level feature fusion, and opti-
mizes the network’s attention to different feature cues, thereby
significantly improving the generalization capability for Deep-
fake detection.TABLE III further demonstrates the excellent
generalization ability of LGDF-Net. Its performance in the
three subsets of FF++ (LQ) surpasses that of the compared
methods. It indicates that LGDF-Net can effectively enhance
generalization by adequately extracting different forgery cues
from the face separately.
D. Ablation Study
LGDF-Net consists of four components: the MSFE module,
the local compression branch composed of LCM, the global
expansion branch composed of GEM, and MLFF. To verify the
efficacy of these components, a series of ablation experiments
are implemented on the DFDC, FF++ (HQ), and F++(LQ)
datasets.
TABLE IV presents the results of the quantitative experi-
ments under different combinations of configurations. When
the network uses standard convolution rather than the MSFE
module to extract features, the detection performance of
LGDF-Net significantly degrades despite maintaining both
the local compression branch and global expansion branch.
It indicates that standard convolution loses a large amount
of detail information during feature extraction, which lim-
ited the network’s ability to learn in subsequent stages and
reduces its expressiveness. In contrast, the MSFE module is
designed to maximize the retention of key image features
from multiple scale, which effectively reduces the information
loss by integrating different types of image information in the
space and refines richer detailed features for network learning.
In addition, when the network consists of only a local com-
pression branch or global expansion branch, it also can achieve
quite excellent detection performance. It proves that the local
compression branch based on LCM can accurately highlight
key artifact regions and effectively suppress the interference of
background noise. The GEM assists global expansion branch
to understand the image contextual information, and enhance
the extraction of subtle texture information. Moreover, the
detection efficacy of the network is significantly enhanced
when these two branches act in concert. It verifies that both
local artifact features and global texture information are key
cues for identifying forgeries. To enhance the network to
learn the intrinsic connection between these two types of
features, the MLFF strategy is adopted to integrate the local
and global features and realize the joint expression of local
and global branches through hierarchical fusion. As listed in
TABLE IV, it can be seen that the detection network improves
the detection accuracy by 1.00% and 0.43% in the FF++(HQ)
and F++(LQ) datasets with the help of the fusion strategy,
respectively. The above analysis demonstrates the effectiveness
of each component of LGDF-Net.
E. Experimental Analysis
1)
Visualization Analysis:
Here, the effectiveness of
LGDF-Net is validated through visualization. Grad-CAM [54]
and line plots are employed to illustrate the feature extraction
capabilities of LGDF-Net and the roles of different configura-
tions in the detection process.
To better understand the impact of local and global branches
on detection performance, the accuracy (ACC) of each branch
across different training epochs is presented in Fig.8. It illus-
trates that the overall performance of LGDF-Net surpasses that
of any single branch during the training phase. The training
accuracy of LGDF-Net continues to improve as the perfor-
mance of each branch stabilizes with the increase of training
epochs. It indicates that the proposed LGDF-Net effectively
leverages the advantages of both local and global branches, and
superior performance can be achieved by integrating feature
information from both, which eventually validates the efficacy
of the dual-branch fusion network. Furthermore, the final
performance of the global branch exceeds that of the local
branch, and it demonstrates that global information extraction
has a more significant impact on Deepfake detection.
The Grad-CAM visualization results of different methods on
the FF++ dataset are shown in Fig.9. It reveals that most heat
maps from other methods focus on regions outside the face
and background information, while only a few targets the key
areas of the face. In contrast, the heat maps produced by the
proposed LGDF-Net for Deepfake (DF) and FaceSwap (FS)
effectively emphasize the unnatural regions of the face, and the
local artifacts and texture variations are highlighted. Moreover,
in NeuralTextures (NT), the heat maps exhibit good coverage
of critical facial locations. These findings further demonstrate
the superiority of the proposed LGDF-Net.
2) Computational Efficiency Analysis:
In order to ver-
ify the effectiveness of our proposed method in practical
Authorized licensed use limited to: Fengchia University. Downloaded on September 15,2026 at 08:09:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- PAGE 10 ---

5498
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 35, NO. 6, JUNE 2025
TABLE IV
ABLATION STUDY OF DIFFERENT COMPONENTS ON LGDF-NET
Fig. 8.
Visualization of the training accuracy of the proposed scheme under
different network configurations.
Fig. 9.
Grad-CAM visualization of different methods on FF++ dataset.
applications,
the
computational
efficiency
of
LGDF-Net
is compared with some state-of-the-art methods, such as
XceptionNet [4], F3Net [49] and Recce [50], in terms of
params and inference time. The computational efficiency
results are shown in TABLE V.
From TABLE V, it can be seen that the number of param-
eters in LGDF-Net is larger than those of other methods
except F3Net. The increase of parameters is due to the addition
of multiple convolutional layers, which were incorporated to
enhance the network’s feature extraction capability, particu-
larly to facilitate the sufficient extraction of both local and
global features at each layer. In terms of inference time, the
TABLE V
COMPARISON OF COMPUTATIONAL EFFICIENCY OF MODELS
average inference time of a single image on the GPU is
calculated. Xception [4] shows the shortest inference time in
TABLE V, because Xception [4] is a backbone classification
network that does not include additional modules for Deep-
fake detection. In contrast, LGDF-Net demonstrates a clear
advantage over other Deepfake detection methods in terms
of inference time. It achieves faster inference speed while
maintaining high detection accuracy and generalization ability.
The experimental results demonstrate that the proposed
LGDF-Net outperforms existing methods in terms of accuracy
and generalization for deepfake detection. Furthermore, its
fast inference speed offers significant advantages for real-time
detection and large-scale deployment scenarios.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a local and global feature based dual-branch
fusion network LGDF-Net is proposed. The network learns
the unique properties of local artifact features and global
texture features separately, which can compressively capture
these two types of Deepfake cues. Among them, the local
compression branch composed of LCM modules focuses on
key local regions to mine local artifact clues. The global
expansion branch composed of GEM modules deepens the
ability to understand the image globally through the extracted
contextual information for capturing finer facial texture infor-
mation. In addition, the carefully designed MSFE module and
MLFF strategy to assist LGDF-Net for Deepfake detection.
The MSFE can enhance the extraction of facial spatial features
to minimize information loss during the network learning
process. It provides a rich joint feature representation for
the network by enhancing the synergy between local arti-
fact features and global texture features at different levels.
Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed LGDF-Net
shows significant advantages in both detection accuracy and
generalization compared to some state-of-the-art methods.
Our future work will focus on inter-frame forge information
Authorized licensed use limited to: Fengchia University. Downloaded on September 15,2026 at 08:09:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- PAGE 11 ---

LONG et al.: LGDF-Net: LOCAL AND GLOBAL FEATURE-BASED DUAL-BRANCH FUSION NETWORKS
5499
for deepfake detection based on the forging cues between
consecutive frames in a Deepfake video.
REFERENCES
[1] I. Goodfellow et al., “Generative adversarial nets,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., Jan. 2023, pp. 1–9.
[2] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,”
in Proc. NIPS, vol. 33, 2020, pp. 6840–6851.
[3] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks for
large-scale image recognition,” 2014, arXiv:1409.1556.
[4] F. Chollet, “Xception: Deep learning with depthwise separable convo-
lutions,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jul. 2017, pp. 1800–1807.
[5] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.
[6] Z. Wang et al., “Learning to detect head movement in unconstrained
remote gaze estimation in the wild,” in Proc. IEEE Winter Conf. Appl.
Comput. Vis. (WACV), Mar. 2020, pp. 3443–3452.
[7] B. Huang, J. Li, J. Chen, G. Wang, J. Zhao, and T. Xu, “Anti-UAV410:
A thermal infrared benchmark and customized scheme for tracking
drones in the wild,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 46,
no. 5, pp. 2852–2865, May 2024.
[8] J. Zhao, J. Li, H. Liu, S. Yan, and J. Feng, “Fine-grained multi-human
parsing,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 128, no. 8, pp. 2185–2203, 2020.
[9] H. Chen, Y. Lin, B. Li, and S. Tan, “Learning features of intra-
consistency and inter-diversity: Keys toward generalizable deepfake
detection,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 33, no. 3,
pp. 1468–1480, Mar. 2023.
[10] J. Yang, S. Xiao, A. Li, W. Lu, X. Gao, and Y. Li, “MSTA-Net: Forgery
detection by generating manipulation trace based on multi-scale self-
texture attention,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 32,
no. 7, pp. 4854–4866, Jul. 2022.
[11] Y. Yu et al., “MSVT: Multiple spatiotemporal views transformer for
DeepFake video detection,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol.,
vol. 33, no. 9, pp. 4462–4471, Sep. 2023.
[12] D. Zhang, J. Chen, X. Liao, F. Li, J. Chen, and G. Yang, “Face forgery
detection via multi-feature fusion and local enhancement,” IEEE Trans.
Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 8972–8977, Sep. 2024.
[13] J. Li et al., “Integrated face analytics networks through cross-dataset
hybrid training,” in Proc. 25th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2017,
pp. 1531–1539.
[14] Z. Guo, G. Yang, J. Chen, and X. Sun, “Fake face detection via
adaptive manipulation traces extraction network,” Comput. Vis. Image
Understand., vol. 204, Mar. 2021, Art. no. 103170.
[15] H. Liu et al., “Spatial-phase shallow learning: Rethinking face forgery
detection in frequency domain,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 772–781.
[16] S. Dong, J. Wang, R. Ji, J. Liang, H. Fan, and Z. Ge, “Implicit
identity leakage: The stumbling block to improving deepfake detection
generalization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 3994–4004.
[17] J. Yang, A. Li, S. Xiao, W. Lu, and X. Gao, “MTD-Net: Learning to
detect deepfakes images by multi-scale texture difference,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 4234–4245, 2021.
[18] R. Wang, Z. Yang, W. You, L. Zhou, and B. Chu, “Fake face images
detection and identification of celebrities based on semantic segmenta-
tion,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett., vol. 29, pp. 2018–2022, 2022.
[19] Z. Liu, X. Qi, and P. H. S. Torr, “Global texture enhancement for fake
face detection in the wild,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 8060–8069.
[20] R. Han, X. Wang, N. Bai, Q. Wang, Z. Liu, and J. Xue, “FCD-Net:
Learning to detect multiple types of homologous deepfake face images,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 2653–2666, 2023.
[21] W. Bai, Y. Liu, Z. Zhang, B. Li, and W. Hu, “AUNet: Learning
relations between action units for face forgery detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023,
pp. 24709–24719.
[22] X. Yang, Y. Li, and S. Lyu, “Exposing deep fakes using inconsistent
head poses,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process.
(ICASSP), May 2019, pp. 8261–8265.
[23] Y. Li, M. Chang, and S. Lyu, “In ictu oculi: Exposing AI created fake
videos by detecting eye blinking,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop Inf.
Forensics Security (WIFS), Dec. 2018, pp. 1–7.
[24] D. Afchar, V. Nozick, J. Yamagishi, and I. Echizen, “MesoNet:
A compact facial video forgery detection network,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Workshop Inf. Forensics Security (WIFS), Dec. 2018, pp. 1–7.
[25] Y. Li and S. Lyu, “Exposing DeepFake videos by detecting face warping
artifacts,” in Proc. CVPR Workshops, Jan. 2018, pp. 1–7.
[26] K. Sun, T. Yao, S. Chen, S. Ding, J. Li, and R. Ji, “Dual contrastive
learning for general face forgery detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
Intell., 2022, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 2316–2324.
[27] J. Fei, Y. Dai, P. Yu, T. Shen, Z. Xia, and J. Weng, “Learning
second order local anomaly for general face forgery detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022,
pp. 20238–20248.
[28] H. Zhao, W. Zhou, D. Chen, T. Wei, W. Zhang, and N. Yu,
“Multi-attentional deepfake detection,” in Proc. Proceedings IEEE/CVF
Conference Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2021, pp. 2185–2194.
[29] C. Tan, Y. Zhao, S. Wei, G. Gu, and Y. Wei, “Learning on gradients:
Generalized artifacts representation for GAN-generated images detec-
tion,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2023, pp. 12105–12114.
[30] J. Li, H. Xie, J. Li, Z. Wang, and Y. Zhang, “Frequency-aware discrim-
inative feature learning supervised by single-center loss for face forgery
detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 6458–6467.
[31] P. He, H. Li, and H. Wang, “Detection of fake images via the ensemble
of deep representations from multi color spaces,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Image Process. (ICIP), Sep. 2019, pp. 2299–2303.
[32] R. Ramachandra, S. Venkatesh, G. Li, and K. Raja, “Differential
newborn face morphing attack detection using wavelet scatter network,”
in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Bio-Eng. Smart Technol. (BioSMART), Jun. 2023,
pp. 1–4.
[33] Y. Luo, Y. Zhang, J. Yan, and W. Liu, “Generalizing face forgery
detection with high-frequency features,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 16312–16321.
[34] P. Zhou, X. Han, V. I. Morariu, and L. S. Davis, “Two-stream neural
networks for tampered face detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW), Jul. 2017, pp. 1831–1839.
[35] K. Shiohara and T. Yamasaki, “Detecting deepfakes with self-blended
images,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 18699–18708.
[36] L. Li et al., “Face X-ray for more general face forgery detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2020, pp. 5001–5010.
[37] A. Khormali and J.-S. Yuan, “Self-supervised graph transformer for
deepfake detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 58114–58127, 2024.
[38] Z. Tan, Z. Yang, C. Miao, and G. Guo, “Transformer-based feature
compensation and aggregation for deepfake detection,” IEEE Signal
Process. Lett., vol. 29, pp. 2183–2187, 2022.
[39] S. Chen, T. Yao, Y. Chen, S. Ding, J. Li, and R. Ji, “Local relation
learning for face forgery detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell.,
vol. 35, 2021, pp. 1081–1088.
[40] C. Shuai et al., “Locate and verify: A two-stream network for improved
deepfake detection,” in Proc. 31st ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2023,
pp. 7131–7142.
[41] Z. Guo, L. Wang, W. Yang, G. Yang, and K. Li, “LDFnet: Lightweight
dynamic fusion network for face forgery detection by integrating local
artifacts and global texture information,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst.
Video Technol., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 1255–1265, Feb. 2024.
[42] Z. Guo, G. Yang, D. Wang, and D. Zhang, “A data augmentation
framework by mining structured features for fake face image detection,”
Comput. Vis. Image Understand., vol. 226, Jan. 2023, Art. no. 103587.
[43] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., vol. 30, Jun. 2017, pp. 1–11.
[44] M. Sandler, A. Howard, M. Zhu, A. Zhmoginov, and L.-C. Chen,
“MobileNetV2: Inverted residuals and linear bottlenecks,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF
Conf.
Comput.
Vis.
Pattern
Recognit.,
Jun.
2018,
pp. 4510–4520.
[45] J. Hu, L. Shen, and G. Sun, “Squeeze-and-excitation networks,” in Proc.
IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jul. 2018, pp. 7132–7141.
[46] A. Rossler, D. Cozzolino, L. Verdoliva, C. Riess, J. Thies, and
M. Niessner, “FaceForensics++: Learning to detect manipulated facial
images,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019,
pp. 1–11.
[47] B. Dolhansky, R. Howes, B. Pflaum, N. Baram, and C. C. Ferrer,
“The deepfake detection challenge (DFDC) preview dataset,” 2019,
arXiv:1910.08854.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Fengchia University. Downloaded on September 15,2026 at 08:09:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- PAGE 12 ---

5500
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 35, NO. 6, JUNE 2025
[48] Y. Li, X. Yang, P. Sun, H. Qi, and S. Lyu, “Celeb-DF: A large-scale
challenging dataset for deepfake forensics,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 3204–3213.
[49] Y. Qian, G. Yin, L. Sheng, Z. Chen, and J. Shao, “Thinking in frequency:
Face forgery detection by mining frequency-aware clues,” in Proc. 16th
Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2020, pp. 86–103.
[50] J. Cao, C. Ma, T. Yao, S. Chen, S. Ding, and X. Yang, “End-to-end
reconstruction-classification learning for face forgery detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022,
pp. 4103–4112.
[51] J. Wang et al., “M2TR: Multi-modal multi-scale transformers for
deepfake detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Multimedia Retr., Jun. 2022,
pp. 615–623.
[52] Z. Guo, G. Yang, D. Zhang, and M. Xia, “Rethinking gradient operator
for exposing AI-enabled face forgeries,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 215,
Apr. 2023, Art. no. 119361.
[53] Y. Wang, K. Yu, C. Chen, X. Hu, and S. Peng, “Dynamic graph learning
with content-guided spatial-frequency relation reasoning for deepfake
detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 7278–7287.
[54] R. R. Selvaraju, M. Cogswell, A. Das, R. Vedantam, D. Parikh, and
D. Batra, “Grad-CAM: Visual explanations from deep networks via
gradient-based localization,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
(ICCV), Oct. 2017, pp. 618–626.
Min Long received the Ph.D. degree in circuits and
systems from the South China University of Science
and Technology, Guangzhou, China, in 2006. She
was a Visiting Fellow with the Department of Com-
puter Science, The University of Warwick, U.K.,
from 2009 to 2010. She is currently a Professor with
the School of Electronics and Communication Engi-
neering, Guangzhou University, Guangzhou. Her
research interests include digital watermarking and
digital forensics.
Zhenyu Liu received the B.S. degree in information
and computing science from Jinzhong Univer-
sity, China, in 2022. He is currently pursuing
the M.E. degree in computer technology with
Changsha University of Science and Technology,
China. His research interests include deepfake and
deep learning.
Le-Bing
Zhang
received the Ph.D. degree in
computer science and technology from Hunan Uni-
versity, Changsha, China, in 2019. He is currently an
Assistant Professor with the School of Computer and
Artificial Intelligence, Huaihua University, China.
His research interests include digital forensics, mul-
timedia security, and deep learning.
Fei Peng (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree
in circuits and systems from the South China Uni-
versity of Science and Technology, Guangzhou,
China, in 2006. He was a Visiting Fellow with the
Department of Computer Science, The University
of Warwick, U.K., from 2009 to 2010. He was a
Visiting Professor with the SeSaMe Centre, School
of Computing, National University of Singapore,
in 2016. He is currently a Professor with the School
of Artificial Intelligence, Guangzhou University,
Guangzhou. His research interests include digital
watermarking and digital forensics.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Fengchia University. Downloaded on September 15,2026 at 08:09:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
