

--- PAGE 1 ---

979-8-3315-4949-7/26/$31.00 ©2026 IEEE 
Lightweight Hybrid Neural Architecture for Real-
Time Deepfake Screening and Content Integrity 
Preservation 
Santhoshkumar S. P. 
Assistant Professor (SG) 
Department of Computer Science and 
Design 
Vel Tech Rangarajan Dr. Sagunthala 
R&D Institute of Science and 
Technology 
Avadi, Chennai, Tamilnadu, India – 
600062. 
spsanthoshkumar16@gmail.com 
ORCID ID: 0000-0001-8531-759X 
 
Bharath Reddy Bethi 
Independent Researcher 
956 120th Ave SE Lake Stevens WA 
98258 
bethibharath@gmail.com
Sathyaseelan G. M. 
Assistant Professor 
Department of Information Technology 
JKK Natraja college of Engineering 
and Technology 
Kumarapalayam, Tamilnadu, India - 
638183. 
gmsathyaseelan@gmail.com 
ORCID ID: 0009-0008-1921-8356 
 
 
 
Saurabh Chandra  
Associate Professor 
Bennett University 
Greater Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India - 
201310. 
saurabhchandranls@gmail.com  
ORCID ID: 0000-0003-4172-9968
Sai Krishna Gaduputi Subbammagari 
Research Scholar 
Department of Computer Science 
University of Nebraska Lincoln 
7506 Poppleton Plaza, Omaha, NE 
68124, USA 
sgaduputisubbammag2@huskers.unl.ed
u 
 
 
 
Gajalakshmi S 
Research Scholar 
Department of Computer Science and 
Engineering 
Vel Tech Rangarajan Dr. Sagunthala 
R&D Institute of Science and 
Technology 
Avadi, Chennai, Tamilnadu, India- 
600062. 
2006.gaja@gmail.com  
Abstract—With 
the 
help 
of 
sophisticated 
artificial 
intelligence (AI), the so-called deepfakes, both photos and 
videos, are becoming more and more real and pose a threat to 
the credibility, privacy, and integrity of content of the 
population. Although very advanced, current deepfake 
detectors are typically overly biased towards either spatial or 
temporal delays, are typically based on intensive computing 
architectures, and lack interpretability, which limits their 
usefulness in real-world applications, resilience and ability to 
apply to a wide range of lives. In order to fill the 
abovementioned gaps, this paper suggests a hybrid neural 
network to preserve content integrity and to screen real-time 
deepfakes. The proposed architecture will be a hybrid of Long 
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) sub-model that should be able to 
detect temporal distortions, e.g., irregular facial movement and 
abnormal motion pattern, and a MobileNet backbone that can 
help extract spatial features in a more efficient way. When 
trained on a large and heterogeneous dataset of authentic and 
manipulated samples, MobileNetLSTM framework is based on 
the state-of-the-art accuracy, which is 97% with its precision, 
recall, and F1-scores of 93, 94, and 93, respectively. Due to the 
lightweight design, the proposed model can be deployed on a 
resource-constrained platform with low-latency inference, 
which can be used in digital forensics, social media theaters, 
and content checks. Also, explainable AI (XAI) approaches 
based on Grad-CAM heatmaps are included to identify 
anomalous regions on the faces that impact model outputs, 
which increases clarity and trust in the users. All in all, this 
work offers a high-performance, scalable, and interpretable 
way to enhance the authenticity of digital media, and future 
research should focus on multimodal deepfake analysis, 
continuous learning to keep up with new forms of 
manipulation and be more resilient to the new generative 
models. 
Keywords—Hybrid 
Neural 
Architecture, 
Real-Time 
Screening, Content Integrity Preservation, Temporal Feature 
Analysis, Spatial Feature Extraction, Media Authentication 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The fast-moving evolution of AI based generative 
technologies has emerged revolutionarily in terms of 
synthetic media creation. Techniques are now making it 
possible to generate incredibly realistic images and videos, 
and often indistinguishable from the real thing [1]. While 
these innovations have advantageous uses in entertainment, 
media and creative industries, they have at the same time 
posed significant risks to society [2]. The large accessibility 
of these tools has led to the creation and dissemination of 
malicious deepfake content, especially on social media 
platforms, and this poses great threats for issues related to 
privacy and content integrity and threatens public trust. 
Recent reports indicate the exponential expansion of the use 
of deepfake videos for blackmail, fraud, or the creation of 
pornographic videos of public figures, as well as deepfakes 
used to manipulate regular people through fake videos of a 
relative [3]. Alarmingly, research shows that a significant 
portion of the public is still unaware of the consumer 
manipulations that are happening: 71% of people trust videos 
potentially made up. Reliable detection systems are therefore 
of critical importance. 
To thwart against these threats a range of deepfake 
detection techniques have been developed such as CNNs, 
ViT, Linformer variants, and hybrid models [4]. These 
approaches mostly aim to capture spatial inconsistent aspects 
and time inconsistent aspects of manipulated media, e.g. 
irregular facial movements, unnatural facial expressions, 
lighting inconsistency, etc. While such models have shown 
great levels of accuracy under controlled conditions, they 
often face a number of limitations: Many models are 
computationally expensive, and can only be used over short-
timeframes; others lack robust generalization, and therefore 
performance declines upon exposure to unknown techniques 
of deepfake generation. Moreover, the present methods focus 
commonly on static images or audio-only data, leaving some 
2026 1st International Conference on Emerging Trends in Advancements and Applications of Computational Intelligence Techniques (ETAACT) | 979-8-3315-4949-7/26/$31.00 ©2026 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ETAACT69135.2026.11541509
Authorized licensed use limited to: OREGON STATE UNIV. Downloaded on September 18,2026 at 10:39:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- PAGE 2 ---

room for discovering video-based deepfakes, where both the 
spatial and temporal analysis play an important role [5]. 
Overcoming such limitations, this work proposes a 
lightweight hybrid neural architecture consisted with the 
MobileNet backbone for spatial feature extraction with the 
LSTM module to enjoy the temporal dynamics such as 
irregular facial movements, as well as subtle inconsistencies 
in the temporal dimension. The MobileNet and LSTM 
consists of a deep neural network optimized for real-time 
inheritance on computational-hobbled downside devices, as 
these are not regulated by calculation resources thus keeping 
the high degree of detection accuracy and minimum of 
calculation resources. This makes it extremely suitable to be 
deployed in digital forensics, social media monitoring, news 
verification pipelines, law enforcement applications. 
A. Work Contributions 
a) Development of Hybrid Architecture: A novel 
fusion of MobileNet and LSTM architectures for the 
combined analysis of spatial temporal features by deepfake 
videos. 
b) Increased 
Robustness 
and 
Generalization: 
Improved ability to take in multiple sources of data and a 
wide range of deepfake creation techniques. 
c) Computational Efficiency: Lower processing costs 
that allow computation to be in real time without being more 
degrading to detection accuracy. 
d) Explainable AI Integration: The strategy of 
incorporating Grad-CAM heatmaps to show regions that 
affect predictions for a better understanding and improved 
trust by users and to improve interpretability. 
II. LITERATURE REVIEW 
Geeta Rani et al., (2025) the convolutional neural 
networks, transformer models and the Linformer-based 
architectures have all been studied in the previous deepfake 
detection research and they all have advantages in the spatial 
feature extraction and attention-based analysis. However, as 
the technology to create deepfakes improves and often 
requires large computational resources, most methods show 
reduced accuracy. According to some of the latest research, 
hybrid architectures, when Linformer's lower attention 
complexity meets the efficiency of transformers, betoken the 
robustness, generalization, and real-time performance of 
deepfake detection tasks [6]. 
Siddiqui Muhammad Yasir et al., (2025), in an attempt to 
deal with the growing threats that are manipulated media 
have posed, most previous studies that tried to detect 
deepfakes focused on deep learning approaches and visual 
feature analysis. Keyframing, machine learning classifiers 
and texture descriptions such as HOG, LBP, KAZE have 
been proven to be able to increase accuracy yet reduce 
computation costs. Recent studies deem the development of 
effective and portable deepfake detection solutions necessary 
by showing that feature-level fusion and inefficient models 
can achieve high performance on conventional datasets [7]. 
Recently, we are seeing that the literature is giving 
particular attention to the rapid developments in deepfake 
generation and limited approaches to secure the authenticity 
of digital media. Studies from 2018-2024 focus on detection 
techniques covering video, image and audio analysis with 
focuses mostly on deep learning, computer vision, and other 
advanced machine learning techniques. These works show in 
total the increasing trend towards autonomous, robust and 
multi-modal deepfake detection systems to fight ever more 
sophisticated manipulations [8]. 
Georgios Petmezas et al., (2025) suggested that the 
deepfake detection has become more dependent on deep 
learning approaches using spatial plus temporal analysis. 
Recent studies combine CNNs, LSTMs, and Transformers, 
sometimes combined with facial features models to enhance 
accuracy and efficiency for a variety of quality of the video 
and types of manipulation. These works emphasize the 
tendency toward hybrid architectures which deal with the 
local and global temporal information for strong and real-
time detection [9]. 
Muhammad Javid et al., (2024) have proposed the recent 
Deepfake detection research delves into the exploration of 
hybrid deep learning models that integrate lightweight CNN 
with a deep neural network models to capture the subtle 
facial 
manipulations 
and 
complex 
visual 
features. 
Approaches such as MesoNet and ResNet hybrid sometimes 
enhanced with eye movement analysis have shown a high 
accuracy and real-time potential for video forensics and 
verification of content integrity [10]. 
Hanan Saleh Alhaji et al., (2024) have proposed the 
recent studies in the detection of deepfakes focus on hybrid 
methods that use optimization-based feature extraction 
approaches such as ACO-PSO in pairing with deep learning 
models. These methods increase the detection accuracy and 
robustness by incorporating subtleties in spatial and temporal 
patterns, 
facilitating 
the real-time detection of 
the 
manipulated videos, and improving the generalization of the 
manipulated videos to the deepfakes not already covered 
[11]. 
Arash Heidari et al., (2024) proposed the recent deepfake 
detection research leverage deep learning and advancement 
of frameworks such as blockchains along with federated 
learning, capsule networks and CNNs to design improved 
accuracy, generalization and privacy of data. These 
approaches combat the increasing threat of believable 
deepfakes, and maintain source confidentiality and increase 
media authenticity [12]. 
Sherin Mathews et al., (2023) suggested that the major 
focus of the recent research on detecting deepfakes has been 
to use high-quality, diverse datasets and bias-aware models. 
Approaches that include a combination of DL architectures, 
to enhance the detection of deepfakes to increase accuracy 
and transparency. Deepfake detection is one of the 
challenges in determining the cause and effect of 
manipulation using deep learning technology [13]. 
Marriam Nawaz et al., (2022) It is proposed that the 
recent research in deepfake detection focuses on deep 
learning methods such as ResNet systems to identify fake 
visual content reliably. It is pointed out of their robustness 
with different datasets and explainability using heatmaps and 
cross datasets validation for practical and safe deployment 
[14]. 
Dennis Siegel et al., (2021) proposed the current research 
for deepfake detection mostly focuses on neural network-
based feature learning, but hand-crafted features are also 
useful for interpretability and generalization. Studies reveal 
Authorized licensed use limited to: OREGON STATE UNIV. Downloaded on September 18,2026 at 10:39:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- PAGE 3 ---

that a combination of multiple feature sets can be used with 
fusion strategies can provide similar performance to deep 
learning models with more plausibility validation in forensic 
applications [15]. 
III. PROPOSED METHODOLOGY 
The proposed methodology addresses Spatial Feature-
Based Stream and Temporal Based Stream with Merge 
Architecture: 
A 
lightweight 
hybrid 
neural 
network 
architecture inside a Deepfake which can be applied to real-
time depth fake detection verifier and content integrity 
preservation. MobileNet is used for spatial feature extraction 
and LSTM classical computer network used for feature 
extraction of temporal. The architecture is optimized as 
resource-constrained as edge devices the high accuracy, 
precision and interpretability. 
 
Fig. 1. Block Diagram of Proposed Methodology. 
A. Dataset Preparation 
A diverse and large-scale data set was curating to train 
and test the proposed model and it contains real as well as 
manipulated video samples. The dataset contains repositories 
for deepfakes that are publicly available such as 
FaceForensics++, Celeb-DF(v2) and synthetic contents 
created through GANs and other AI-based face swapping 
techniques. 
The cross-dataset of robustness was tested on Celeb-DF 
and tested on FaceForensics++ (FF++) and the test provided 
an analysis of the generalization of manipulation across 
various manipulation techniques and compression levels. 
Bootstrap resampling with 1,000 runs was applied to ensure 
the 95% confidence intervals were computed to demonstrate 
the metric reliability. The efficacy of inference was 
determined on a system with NVIDIA RTX 3060, where the 
average latency per frame is about 60 ms, and the efficacy of 
Grad-CAM localization was quantitatively confirmed with 
the help of the IoU parameter in the comparison with the 
annotated 
forged 
regions, 
indicating 
credible 
and 
understandable model attention. 
B. Preprocessing Steps 
a) Frame Extraction: Videos are being sampled at 
regular frames and derive each of such frames to 224x224 
pixels in order to match the inputs in MobileNet. 
b) Face Detection & Alignment: Faces are detected 
using MTCNN and aligned to make them have the same 
orientation towards the frames. 
c) Normalization: The normalized the pixel values in 
the range [0,1], so as to see faster convergence during the 
training process. 
d) Data Augmentation: A range of DA techniques are 
applied to increase generalization. 
C. Hybrid Model Architecture 
The proposed MobileNet and LSTM framework merges 
the advantages of the lightweight convolutional neural 
networks and the sequential modeling process: 
a) MobileNet Backbone Backend Space Feature 
Extraction 
MobileNet is used as the backbone for the spatial feature 
extraction because of its efficient depthwise separable 
convolutional layers which drastically reduces the amount of 
parameters and reduces the computational overhead 
compared to conventional convolutional networks. In the 
proposed methodology, for each frame of video, MobileNet 
processes the frame individually in order to obtain rich 
representation in the spatial domain; specifically, information 
about these shots such as texture inconsistencies, facial 
misalignments, and subtle local artifacts, that are often 
indicative of manipulation, are focused. The network 
produces a small feature vector for each frame that represents 
these spatial characteristics that it subsequently uses to 
perform further temporal analysis and identify a deepfake. 
b) Using Both ends Bidirectional LSTM of Temporal 
Feature Modeling 
The extracted frame-level feature vectors are fed into a 
bidirectional LSTM network one by one in order to model 
temporal relationships among video frames. This LSTM 
module behaves well in terms of irregularities in facial 
dynamics, motion inconsistencies and unnatural expressions 
obtained over the consecutive frames which are generally the 
indicators of manipulation. By analyzing the temporal 
patterns on alongside the spatial features, the model is able to 
accurately differentiate both the authentic videos and 
deepfake, even if the individual video frames look visually 
realistic. 
c) Classification and Feature Fusion 
To exploit both the information in space and in time, the 
feature vectors that are extracted from MobileNet and also 
the temporal representations that are learned by the LSTM 
are concatenated in a single feature vector. This combined 
representation then passes through a fully connected layer 
with a softmax activation function which gives the 
probability of the input video being real or being 
manipulated. By utilizing both the spatiotemporal cues, this 
module allows strong and accurate classification of the 
deepfake content. 
d) Edge Deployment Versus Computational Efficiency 
The architecture that is being proposed is designed to 
keep the computational complexity low, which makes it ideal 
to be deployed on resource-constrained edge-based devices. 
The application of depth wise separable convolutions in 
MobileNet, optimizing LSTM units for temporal modeling, 
as well as reducing features at the frame-level; all add to the 
fact that the system can provide real-time inference. This 
efficiency takes place without sacrificing accuracy on 
Authorized licensed use limited to: OREGON STATE UNIV. Downloaded on September 18,2026 at 10:39:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- PAGE 4 ---

detecting deepfake, making this possible for practical and 
responsive deepfake screening in real-world applications. 
e) Protocol for Training and Evaluation 
The model is trained using the cross-entropy loss 
function which is appropriate for binary classification 
problems and optimized using the Adam optimizer with an 
early learning rate of 0.0001 and learning rate decay for 
faster convergence. Training is performed in batches of 32 
data points for 50 epochs. 20% of the dataset is set to 
validation to keep track of the performance of the training 
model to prevent overfitting. For a comprehensive 
performance evaluation, standard evaluation metrics are 
calculated, decreasing a well-rounded measure of the 
deepfake detection capabilities of the model. 
f) Model Interpretability using Grad-CAM 
To 
make 
model 
interpretation 
transparent 
and 
comprehensible, the Grad-CAM is incorporated in the 
proposed model. Grad-CAM creates visual explanations by 
identifying areas of input frames that contribute the most to 
the model's predictions, especially that of anomalies in facial 
areas that would be indicative of manipulation. This 
visualization enables forensic analysts and end-users to make 
sense of the reasoning behind a deepfake classification, 
therefore helping to improve trust, accountability and the 
practicality of the system. 
g) Deployment Considerations 
The proposed methodology is intended for real-time 
deployment for a variety of practical applications. In digital 
forensics, it can be used to help detect manipulated evidence 
in investigations and in social media monitoring, it can be 
used to automatically screen videos uploaded for deepfakes. 
News organizations can use the system to authenticate visual 
content, while law enforcement agencies can use the system 
to quickly identify fraudulent or malicious videos, helping to 
improve public safety. The architecture can be deployed at 
the server-side or the edge devices to scale it, and ensures 
low-five latency performance as well as a robust and reliable 
deepfake detection. 
The 
general 
work 
procedure 
of 
the 
proposed 
methodology starts from input of video, then frame 
extraction and face detection with alignment to make the 
facial regions consistent. Spatial features were then extracted 
from each frame using MobileNet that can capture texture 
anomalies, local artifacts and facial inconsistencies. These 
frame-level features are fed in a sequence through a bilateral 
LSTM to capture the temporal dependency to identify the 
anomalies in the facial dynamics and inconsistency in motion 
between consecutive frames. The spatial and temporal 
features are combined and fed through a completely 
connected layer to obtain the probability of the given video 
being real or manipulated. To increase the interpretability 
level, Grad-CAM heatmaps are created, showing which areas 
are more important for the model's predictions. By 
combining 
light-weight 
CNN-based 
spatial 
analysis, 
temporal sequence modeling and explainable outputs, the 
proposed MobileNet and LSTM hybrid architecture provides 
highly accurate, robust, and interpretable deepfake detection 
which can be deployed for real-time, large-scale, deepfake 
detection. 
IV. RESULTS OBTAINED AND PERFORMANCE 
A. Experimental Setup 
The proposed model, MobileNet-LSTM hybrid was 
trained and evaluated using a variety of such real and 
manipulated video samples. The data were from public 
repositories, including FaceForensics++, Celeb-DF(v2) and 
fake data created by image generation. Videos were 
processed in advance, by frames extraction with resolution 
224x224, face detection and alignment with MTCNN, 
normalization and data augmentation. The model was 
trained, using the cross-entropy loss function along with the 
Adam optimizer (learning rate initial 0.0001, learning rate 
decay applied), with a batch size of 32 and over 50 epochs, 
using a 20% validation split to follow the performance of the 
model, in order to avoid overfitting. Evaluation metrics 
included accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score, while 
Grad-CAM technique was used to visualize important 
regions contributing towards the predictions. 
B. Performance Metrics 
In deepfake detection tasks, it is possible to assess model 
performance via classification metrics created from the 
confusion matrix. Let: TP - Deepfakes correctly classified, 
TN - Real videos correctly classified, FP - Real videos 
misclassified as deepfakes and FN -Deepfakes misclassified 
as real 
• 
Accuracy: Assesses the accuracy of the general 
model. 
Accuracy = (TP+FP) / (TP+TN+FP+FN) 
- 
(1) 
• 
Precision (Positive Predictive Value): Represents 
the proportion of detected deepfakes which are 
deepfakes. Precision is high and this implies 
reduction in false alarms. 
Precision = (TP) / (TP+FP) 
 
- 
(2) 
• 
Recall (Sensitivity / True Positive Rate): Assesses 
the capability of the model to identify deepfakes. 
High recall implies less false omissions. 
Recall = (TP) / (TP +FN)  
 
- 
(3) 
• 
F1-Score: The harmonic average of the precision 
and recall, which is a composite measure of the 
false positives and false negative. 
F1-Score = 2 * (Precision * Recall) / (Precision +Recall) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 
(4) 
• 
Specificity (True Negative Rate): Assesses the 
capability of the model to identify the real videos. 
Specificity =(TN) / (TN+FP) 
 
- 
(5) 
• 
Balanced Accuracy: In particular, it is helpful when 
working with unequal datasets when the amount of 
real and fake videos is different. 
Balanced Accuracy = (Recall + Specificity)/2 
-(6) 
• 
Matthews Correlation Coefficient (MCC): A 
stronger measure that reflects each of the four 
values of the confusion matrix, which is arguably 
better when this is used in binary classification 
with imbalanced data. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: OREGON STATE UNIV. Downloaded on September 18,2026 at 10:39:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- PAGE 5 ---

MCC 
= 
(TP+TN)-(FP*FN) 
/ 
√(TP+TN)(FP+FN)(TN+FP)(TN+FN) 
- 
(7) 
• 
Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC-ROC): 
Determines the capacity of the 
model to 
differentiate between real and fake videos at any 
classification threshold. 
Assuming that TPR and FPR are the actual positive and 
false positive rates respectively: 
AUC = ∫10 TPR(FPR)dFPR  
- 
 
(8) 
• 
Inference Efficiency Metric: In the case of real-
time deployment on edge devices, it does not 
matter: 
Latency Per Frame = (Total Interference Time)/ No. of 
Frames (ms per frames) 
 
 
- 
(9) 
• 
Interpretability Metric: Localization Accuracy or 
IoU of highlighted areas and ground truth areas of 
manipulation can be used to quantify grad-cam 
visualizations: 
IoU= 
|RegionGradeCAM ∩ RegionGT| / |RegionGradeCAM ∪ 
RegionGT |  
 
 
 
- 
(10) 
The proposed architecture was shown to have high 
accuracy and robustness with different deepfake data sets. 
The performance of the MobileNet-LSTM model when 
compared with baseline architectures is summarized in Table 
I. 
TABLE I.  
PERFORMANCE OF THE MOBILENET - LSTM MODEL  
Model 
Accuracy 
(%) 
Precision 
(%) 
Recall 
(%) 
F1-Score 
(%) 
CNN (EfficientNet) 
92.5 
90.3 
91 
90.6 
ResNet-50 
93.2 
91.5 
92.1 
91.8 
MobileNet–LSTM 
(Proposed) 
97 
93 
94 
93 
 
Fig. 2. Performance of the MobileNet - LSTM Model. 
The MobileNet-LSTM hybrid model was better than the 
traditional 
CNN-based 
baselines 
with 
metrics. 
The 
improvements are attributed to the ability of the modeling to 
capture spatial anomalies and temporal consistencies jointly 
in videos, despite the appearance of individual frames in 
videos appearing to be realistic. 
C. Inference Efficiency 
To ensure the model is highly suitable to be deployed for 
real-time inference on edge devices, inference latency is 
measured over various architectures. Table 2 shows the 
average per frame inference time. 
TABLE II.  
INFERENCE LATENCY COMPARISON  
Model 
Inference Latency (ms) 
CNN (EfficientNet / ResNet) 
42 
ViT (ViT-B/16, Swin-T) 
78 
MobileNet–LSTM (Proposed) 
60 
 
Fig. 3. Inference Latency Comparison. 
In spite of slightly increased delay than pure CNN 
models, the proposed model, MobileNet and LSTM, 
guarantees real-time performance (less than 70 ms/frame), 
balancing 
performance 
accuracy 
and 
computational 
efficiency for edge. Model performed, in which the 
contributions of spatial and temporal modules are analyzed. 
The individual modules were used gave the performance 
separately are shown in table 3. 
TABLE III.  
RESULTS 
Configuration 
Accuracy 
(%) 
Precision 
(%) 
Recall 
(%) 
F1-Score 
(%) 
MobileNet only 
(Spatial) 
91.2 
89.5 
90 
89.7 
LSTM only 
(Temporal) 
88.5 
87 
87.5 
87.2 
MobileNet + LSTM 
(Hybrid) 
97 
93 
94 
93 
 
Fig. 4. Ablation Study Result. 
The results show that temporal modeling improves the 
detection to a large extent and when this modeling technique 
is combined with spatial feature extraction the best 
performance is achieved. 
D. Explainability with Grad-CAM 
Grad-CAM visualization was created for both real and 
deepfake videos. Heatmaps were very good at pointing out 
facial areas with manipulation artifacts, such as misaligned 
eyes, inconsistent textures and unnatural expressions. These 
Authorized licensed use limited to: OREGON STATE UNIV. Downloaded on September 18,2026 at 10:39:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- PAGE 6 ---

visualizations add to the interpretability and they allow 
analysts and end-users to grasp model decisions and trust the 
predictions. 
E. Discussion 
The proposed MobileNet and LSTM hybrid architecture 
has provided a robust, efficient and interpretable solution for 
deepfake detection. Its lightweight design provides support 
to deploy it in real-time with edge devices, and at the same 
time obtain state-of-the-art detection metrics. Applications 
Span Digital Forensics, Social Media Monitoring, News 
Verification and Law Enforcement Ever the versatile tool, 
applications of Content Integrity Preservation range across 
digital forensics, social media monitoring, news verification, 
law enforcement, etc. Future work will cite multimodal 
detection 
of 
deepfakes, 
online 
adaptation 
to 
new 
manipulation techniques, as well as the resilience for 
generative models of the next generation. 
V. CONCLUSION 
This paper shows an architecture which is composed of a 
mobile lightweight neural network and a two-way LSTM for 
real-time deepfake detection that also preserves the content 
integrity. The proposed framework named MobileNet - 
LSTM can effectively capture both spatial anomalies and 
temporal inconsistencies of videos that achieves high 
detection accuracy of 97%, which is detected with more than 
93% precision, recall and F1-scores. The model exhibits real-
time inferrence capability with a low computational overhead 
suitable real-time application on the deployed resource-
constrained edge devices. Furthermore to the above the 
integration of Grad-CAM visualizations aids with better 
interpretability, which helps forensic analysts and end-users 
better understand the rationale behind the model predictions 
increasing trust and transparency. Ablation studies confirm 
the importance of combining spatial and temporal features to 
get the best performance. The proposed system has practical 
uses in digital forensics, social media monitoring, news 
verification, and law enforcement, and can offer a powerful, 
efficient, and explainable solution to protect media 
authenticity. Future investigation will be on investigating 
multimodal deepfake analysis, ongoing adaptation to deep 
manipulation and improvement of deepfake detection 
resilience against next generation generative models, further 
confining the robustness and generalization of the detection 
framework. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. S. Sengar, A. B. Hasan, S. Kumar et al., "Generative artificial 
intelligence: a systematic review and applications," Multimedia Tools 
and 
Applications, 
vol. 
84, 
pp. 
23661–23700, 
2025, 
doi: 
10.1007/s11042-024-20016-1. 
[2] L. Nyame and S. Bengesi, "Generative artificial intelligence trend on 
video 
generation," 
Preprints, 
2024, 
doi: 
10.20944/preprints202409.0195.v1. 
[3] G. 
Bansal, 
A. 
Nawal, 
V. 
Chamola, 
and 
N. 
Herencsar, 
"Revolutionizing visuals: The role of generative AI in modern image 
generation," 
ACM 
Transactions 
on 
Multimedia 
Computing, 
Communications, and Applications, vol. 20, no. 11, Art. no. 356, 
Nov. 2024, 22 pp., doi: 10.1145/3689641. 
[4] S. Yadav and S. S. Mangalampalli, "Deepfake defense: Combining 
spatial 
and 
temporal 
cues 
with 
CNN-BiLSTM-transformer 
architecture," PLoS One, vol. 20, no. 11, e0334980, Nov. 2025, doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0334980. 
[5] M. A. Arshed, A. Alwadain, R. F. Ali, S. Mumtaz, M. Ibrahim, and 
A. Muneer, "Unmasking deception: Empowering deepfake detection 
with vision transformer network," Mathematics, vol. 11, no. 17, Art. 
no. 3710, 2023, doi: 10.3390/math11173710. 
[6] G. Rani, A. Kothekar, S. G. Philip, V. S. Dhaka, E. Zumpano, and E. 
Vocaturo, "Lightweight and hybrid transformer-based solution for 
quick and reliable deepfake detection," Frontiers in Big Data 
Networks, vol. 8, 2025, doi: 10.3389/fdata.2025.1521653. 
[7] S. M. Yasir and H. Kim, "Lightweight deepfake detection based on 
multi-feature fusion," Applied Sciences, vol. 15, no. 4, Art. no. 1954, 
2025, doi: 10.3390/app15041954. 
[8] R. Sunil, P. Mer, A. Diwan, R. Mahadeva, and A. Sharma, "Exploring 
autonomous methods for deepfake detection: A detailed survey on 
techniques and evaluation," Heliyon, vol. 11, no. 3, e42273, Feb. 
2025, doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2025.e42273. 
[9] G. Petmezas, V. Vanian, K. Konstantoudakis et al., "Video deepfake 
detection using a hybrid CNN-LSTM-Transformer model for identity 
verification," Multimedia Tools and Applications, vol. 84, pp. 40617–
40636, 2025, doi: 10.1007/s11042-024-20548-6. 
[10] M. Javed, Z. Zhang, F. H. Dahri, and A. A. Laghari, "Real-time 
deepfake video detection using eye movement analysis with a hybrid 
deep learning approach," Electronics, vol. 13, no. 15, Art. no. 2947, 
2024, doi: 10.3390/electronics13152947. 
[11] H. S. Alhaji, Y. Celik, and S. Goel, "An approach to deepfake video 
detection based on ACO-PSO features and deep learning," 
Electronics, vol. 13, no. 12, Art. no. 2398, 2024, doi: 
10.3390/electronics13122398. 
[12] A. Heidari, N. J. Navimipour, H. Dag et al., "A novel blockchain-
based deepfake detection method using federated and deep learning 
models," Cognitive Computation, vol. 16, pp. 1073–1091, 2024, doi: 
10.1007/s12559-024-10255-7. 
[13] S. Mathews, S. Trivedi, A. House et al., "An explainable deepfake 
detection framework on a novel unconstrained dataset," Complex & 
Intelligent 
Systems, 
vol. 
9, 
pp. 
4425–4437, 
2023, 
doi: 
10.1007/s40747-022-00956-7. 
[14] M. Nawaz, A. Javed, and A. Irtaza, “ResNet-Swish-Dense54: A deep 
learning approach for deepfakes detection,” The Visual Computer, vol. 
39, pp. 6323–6344, 2022, doi: 10.1007/s00371-022-02732-7. 
[15] D. Siegel, C. Kraetzer, S. Seidlitz, and J. Dittmann, “Media forensics 
considerations on deepfake detection with hand-crafted features,” 
Journal of Imaging, vol. 7, no. 7, Art. no. 108, 2021, doi: 
10.3390/jimaging7070108. 
 
Authorized licensed use limited to: OREGON STATE UNIV. Downloaded on September 18,2026 at 10:39:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
